OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE 

UPDATED, valid as of 1700 23 January 
Precautionary SAGE meeting on Wuhan Coronavirus (WN-CoV) 
22 January 2020 
Held in 10 Victoria St, London SW1H ONN 

Situation update 
1. DHSC provided an update on current declared cases, deaths and geographic spread. 
2. China has recently revised case definitions. This makes comparisons difficult. 
3. It was reported that diagnostic testing capability in Wuhan is overwhelmed. 
4. There is considerable uncertainty around the data, with almost certainly many more 

cases than have been reported; a reasonable worst case cannot be made reliably under 
such circumstances. 

5. WHO has received some environmental sampling from Wuhan: information on the 
zoonotic reservoir may be forthcoming shortly. 

6. *** Following the meeting, authorities in Wuhan announced the suspension of public 
transport, including outbound trains and flights, from 0200 GMT 23 January. *** 

Current understanding of WN-CoV 
7. There is evidence of person-to-person transmission. It is unknown whether transmission 

is sustainable. 
8. The incubation period is unclear — but appears to be within 5 to 10 days; 14 days after 

contact is a sensible outer limit to use. 
9. It is highly probable that the reproductive number is currently above 1. 
10. It is currently estimated that the mortality rate for WN-CoV is lower than for SARS, but it 

is too early to reliably quantify that rate. 
11. There is insufficient information currently on the genetic strain to comment on WN-CoV's 

origin. 
12. There is no evidence yet on whether individuals are infectious prior to showing 

symptoms. 
13. There is no evidence that individuals are more infectious when symptoms are more 

severe, but that is likely. 
14. There appears to be very little genetic diversity in WN-CoV based on sequences 

available so far. 
15. It is reasonable to argue — based on lessons from MERS and SARS, and consistent with 

exported cases of WN-CoV — that individuals returning from Wuhan are no longer at risk 
if they show no symptoms after 14 days. 

Summary and review of NERVTAG conclusions 
16. NERVTAG does not advise port of entry screening, irrespective of the current limited 

understanding of the epidemiology. 
17. NERVTAG does not advise use of screening questionnaires, pilot declarations or 

requiring confirmation of exit screening at Wuhan. 
18. NERVTAG does support public health information efforts via leaflets, posters and 

broadcast messengers to passengers. 
19. SAGE supports NERVTAG's position both on the value of port screening and on 

monitoring measures. 
20. SAGE would review its position on port screening only if a simple, specific and rapid test 

was available and was deployable at scale across the UK. Temperature and other forms 

OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE 

INQ000383581_0001 



OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE 

of screening are unlikely to be of value and have high false positive and false negative 
rates. 

Transport-related issues 
21. The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has just published 

"Risk assessment guidelines for infectious diseases transmitted on aircraft (RAGIDA) - 
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV)". 

22. ECDC advises use of MERS guidelines for the current outbreak, but acknowledges the 
limitations of its evidence base. 

UK health readiness and planning 
23. The UK currently has good centralised diagnostic capacity for WN-CoV — and is days 

away from a specific test, which is scalable across the UK in weeks. The sensitivity of 
the test is currently unknown. There are conflicting reports of the sensitivity of diagnostic 
tests from upper respiratory tract sampling. 

24. DHSC is developing advice for UK healthcare workers on testing potentially infected 
individuals. 

25. SAGE agreed that DHSC and PHE criteria for testing potentially infected individuals 
were appropriate, i.e. those with symptoms or signs of WN-CoV, and a history of 
travelling to or living in Wuhan in the 14 days prior to symptom onset, including those 
who accessed Wuhan healthcare facilities. SAGE advised that DHSC and PHE should 
be ready to revise those criteria as the situation evolves. 

26. DHSC and PHE also preparing plans for isolating potentially infected individuals and the 
follow up of contacts. 

ACTION: CMO to share the latest iteration of the PHE isolation plan for suspected cases 
and contacts with some of the SAGE participants, in particular behavioural scientists, to 
get their view of its proportionality and advice on how to communicate uncertainty, in 
order to improve subsequent versions. 

ACTION: CMO/DHSC and PHE to consider how NHS primary care facilities might 
respond to an increase of cases and potential cases. 

ACTION: CMO/DHSC and FCO to work together to ensure consistent messaging on 
travel advice to/from Wuhan. 

27. There are no practical preventative actions that HMG might undertake ahead of Chinese 
New Year. 

Triggers for escalating HMG response 
28. Of DHSC's current triggers, there has been infection of healthcare workers and probably 

some sustained human-to-human transmission, but not geographical spread 
unconnected to Wuhan. 

29. SAGE agreed that HMG should review its response either in the case of onward spread 
of WN-CoV person to person outside of China or a severe confirmed case in the UK. 

30. SAGE is unable to say at this stage whether it might be required to reconvene. 

OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE 

INQ000383581_0002 



OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE 

Summary of actions 
CMO to share the latest iteration of the PHE isolation plan for suspected cases and contacts 
with some of the SAGE participants, in particular behavioural scientists, to get their view of 
its proportionality and advice on how to communicate uncertainty, in order to improve 
subsequent versions. 

CMO/DHSC and PHE to consider how NHS primary care facilities might respond to an 
increase of cases and potential cases. 

CMOIDHSC and FCO to work together to ensure consistent messaging on travel advice 
to/from Wuhan. 

Attendees 
SAGE participants: Patrick Valiance, Chris Whitty, Charlotte Watts, Jonathan Van Tam, NR 

NR NR NR - ----------------------- --------------------- James Rubins NR 
By phone: Jeremy Farrar, Phil Blythe, Pasi Penttinen, David Lalloo, Maria Zambonj NR 

NR John Edmunds, NR_._._._._._._._. 

Observing: NR NR Tasha Grant NR  Kavitha Kishen, 
NR NR Stuart Wainwright, Samantha Harris'  NR I+ NR 
NR 

-------- ----- ----- ----- --- -------- ----- ----- ----- ---- -.-. -. 
Secretariat: - - NR- -- __._.-.-.-.--NR NR ._._._._._~._._._._._._NR

OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE 

INQ000383581_0003