Llywodraeth Cymru 
Welsh Government 
STATEMENT 
BY 
THE WELSH GOVERNMENT 
TITLE Statement to mark the International Day of Disabled People 
DATE 1 December 2020 
BY Jane Hutt MS, Deputy Minister and Chief Whip 
Prynhawn da 
This Thursday is the United Nation's International Day of Disabled 
People. Since 1992 the United Nations has designated the 3rd 
December as a day for promoting the rights and well-being of 
disabled people and to celebrate their achievements across the 
world. The theme for 2020 is `Building Back Better: toward a 
disability-inclusive, accessible and sustainable Post COVID -19 
World.' 
The pandemic has shone a light on, and amplified the problems 
within our society. Many of these are not new or specific to COVID 
but they have become more obvious to us all. During the pandemic, 
isolation, disconnect, disrupted routines and diminished services 
1 
INQ000350691_0001 
 have greatly impacted the lives and mental well-being of many 
disabled people. 
The latest available data from ONS shows that in the period March 
to July, in Wales, 68%, or almost 7 in every 10 Covid related deaths 
came from our disabled communities. It has also been reported that 
people with a learning disability were disproportionally more likely to 
die from Covid. I am sure we are all greatly saddened by this. It is 
also emerging that this death rate was not the simple inevitable 
consequence of impairment, as many of these deaths were clearly 
rooted in socioeconomic factors. 
Building on the admittedly slow progress made over the last twenty 
five years since the introduction of the Disability Discrimination Act in 
November 1995, we must take positive action so that we can do 
better as we recover from the effects of COVID. 
Since 2002, the Welsh Government has adopted the Social Model of 
Disability. A model that recognises that people with impairments are 
in fact disabled by the actions of our society, and not by their 
impairments. When we say `actions of our society', we must 
remember that disabling actions are designed and carried out by 
people. It is people and systems that disable, people, whether that 
I N000035069 1_0002 
 is driven by organisational culture, ignorance, prejudice or simple 
indifference. 
While much of our work has correctly been focused on trying to 
mitigate the actions of our disablist culture, I intend to explore how 
we can directly address disablism, in-itself. 
It is important that we all understand this model as it changes the 
way we think. It means we focus on identifying and removing 
barriers to disabled people's contributions. We must build this 
approach into all our work developing and delivering policies across 
the whole of the Senedd's work. 
That is why I am pleased to support the Minister for Housing and 
Local \uthorities'  (r'iernment'c  current consultation on the 
establishment of a new fund to provide support to disabled people to 
seek elected office for the 2021 Senedd elections and the 2022 
Local Government elections. This is a proactive step to reduce some 
of the barriers that may otherwise prevent an individual from 
participating in local democracy and representing their community by 
standing for elected office. 
3 
INQ000350691_0003 
 I very much hope that this fund will encourage disabled people to 
stand as candidates in next year's elections. Their voices need to be 
heard in every part of society. 
Disabled people also play a key part in our economic recovery, and 
this is why in Wales, we will soon have Disabled People Employment 
Champions. These Champions will support employers across Wales 
to create a workforce that is representative and open to all. 
I am pleased to announce employers will be supported by a new 
tool-kit: 'A More Equal Wales: A Practical Guide for Employers 
employing Disabled People', which will be launched this Thursday to 
coincide with the International Day of Disabled People. 
I regularly speak to stakeholders and representatives of Disabled 
People's Organisations through my Disability Equality Forum. I have 
chaired six meetings of this Forum since the start of the pandemic, 
the last meeting was held on 21 October. Their advice and guidance 
has helped us to understand how the pandemic is impacting on 
different communities, what is concerning people, and what we can 
do to make things better, easier, and equitable. 
4 
I N000035069 1_0004 
 I also want to thank the Equality, Local Government and 
Communities Committee cross party group on disabled people, for 
the part it played in exposing the inequitable impacts of Covid 19. 
Disability Forum members contribute to the Welsh Government's 
Accessible Communication Group, who have informed us of the 
difficulties faced by various groups, including disabled people, when 
accessing information during the Covid-19 pandemic. Disability 
Equality Forum members also provided essential feedback on the 
`Creating safer public places: Coronavirus' guidance, ensuring the 
inclusion of accessibility considerations when developing and 
adapting urban centres and green spaces. 
I would like to thank everyone who has contributed to our 
understanding over the past months. In these challenging times 
being able to work so closely with our partners has been a huge 
asset. 
One of the harsh side effects of the pandemic has been the impact 
on the economy and, in particular, third sector organisations' ability 
to fundraise and maintain their income. This in turn has reduced their 
ability to support their members and is making their future less 
certain. 
IN0000350691_0005 
 That is why I am pleased £200,000 (two hundred thousand pounds) 
from the Welsh Government's Reserves for Reconstruction package 
has been allocated to fund disability projects across Wales. It will 
augment the £100,000 allocated to Wales from a UK-wide COVID 
emergency scheme. 
This funding will be distributed as small grants to nine Disabled 
People's Organisations across Wales, supporting vital work, 
providing information and advice and developing new ways to 
respond to the Covid-19 needs of disabled people. 
I am delighted that Professor Debbie Foster from Cardiff University 
has agreed to lead a project to produce a report on the impact of 
COVID on disabled people. Members of the Disability Equality 
Forum will work alongside Professor Foster to bring together 
information, evidence and case studies. 
It is my intention that this important report will inform a refresh of the 
"Action on Disability" framework that I launched in 2019. By 
revisiting the framework in light of Covid, I am determined that we 
will be able to act quickly to embed the learning from this pandemic. 
I N000035069 1_0006 
 With such a range of important work taking place in Wales, I am 
pleased to invite all the Members of the Senedd to celebrate with me 
the contribution of disabled people in Wales on the United Nation's 
International Day of Disabled People. 
Check against delivery 
Embargoed until after Jane Hutt MS, Deputy Minister and Chief Whip 
has delivered the statement. 
INQ000350691_0007 
