Message 

From: 
Sent: 
To: 

CC: 
Subject: 

Name Redacted  @dhsc.gov.uk] 

05/02/2020 18:06:38 
Atherton, Frank (HSS - Chief Medical Officer) [f rank.atherton@gov.wales]; Catherine. CaIderwood@gov.scot; 
Michael.McBride@health-ni.gov.uk 
Whitty, Chris [Chris.Whitty@dhsc.gov.uk] 
CMO coronavirus briefing for DsPH 

Hi all 
As promised on the UK CMOs call earlier, here is a rough write up of Chris' call with the Directors of Public 
Health. 

_._.B.e  .t_.wishes 

NR 

CMO coronavirus briefing for DsPH 
Fri 31 Jan 2020 
0900-0930 

CMO outlined currently epidemiology of outbreak and described two scenarios and how there is the 

• 
potential for a situation in which we would move from containment to mitigation (but this is not the case now). 
We are currently using pandemic flu for reasonable worst case scenario planning 

Q&A: 
o 
o 
o 
o 

CMO confirmed that the pandemic flu model was being used for the time being. 
CMO confirmed that we do not yet know if surviving infection protects against re-infection 
CMO confirms NERVTAG will issue advice on treatment options (currently considering options) 
CMO agrees that planning for mitigation now is wise 

CMO updated on the plane bringing people back from China and changes to geographical case 

• 
definition and clinical case definition 

DCMO Name Redacted] took over as Chair 

Callers flag universities, boarding schools, Chinese community in UK as recipient groups for comms, 

DCMO agrees to communicate to Comms colleagues that detail of comms must be appropriate to 

Q&A: 
o 
listening environment 
o 
and concern for community cohesion (comms to general public) 
o 
led comms in relation to the housing of repatriated individuals in the Wirral and choice of location - DCMO 
commits to pick up in another call and flag this with DHSC colleagues 
o 
questions about the changes to case definitions) 

DCMO commits to share information imparted in the call with the participants via email (promoted by 

Specific request from the North East for information for the public about  quarantine' and better centrally 

Department 
of Health & 
Social Care 

Name Redacted 

Head of Office to the Chief Medical Officer 

..-39-..i.ctoria.St.-L.ar.00n, SW1H OEU 

Name Redacted 

ov.uk 

T' 
1i/ @CMO  England 

-I&S 

..-

INQ000383585_0001 

DH recipients please note: this email will not be saved by CMO Private Office. If you need this for audit purposes, please 
keep a copy for your records. 

This e-mail and any attachments is intended only for the attention of the addressee(s). Its unauthorised use, 
disclosure, storage or copying is not permitted. If you are not the intended recipient, please destroy all copies 
and inform the sender by return e-mail. Any views expressed in this message are not necessarily those of the 
Department of Health and Social Care. Please note: Incoming and outgoing email messages are routinely 
monitored for compliance with our policy on the use of electronic communications. 

INQ000383585_0002 

