
Dear All, 
Ahead of our meeting at 2pm, I have put some high level points that could help us focus the discussion. This is only a 
guide (not an exhaustive list) 
Key strategic intent 
what is the strategy for Wales? 
o options — is it suppression followed by ambition for elimination or is it suppression to an acceptable baseline 
endemicity until vaccine/treatment available? 
o If aiming for elimination — are we in a position to deal with the collateral damage that comes from that effort — 
e.g. economy, jobs, interrupted education 
o If aiming for acceptable baseline endemicity — what level should it be set at? what are the options to protect 
vulnerable groups under this strategy 
2. Where will the current picture take us to in a few weeks time? 
- Case incidence will continue to rise — including to 200/100000 7 day rolling incidence by end of October 
- Associated hospital admission will go up — proportion to ITU will go up 
- Deaths going up 
- outbreaks in Health care settings and care homes 
- university outbreaks will contribute to significant new case burden. 
3. What does global experience suggest? 
- Countries that have gone for suppression followed by intent to eliminate have 3 key factors in their success 
o Very stringent border control to keep imported infections to a lowest possible effect 
■ stopping all non-essential travel 
■ strict enforcement of returning traveller quarantining and evidencing it 
o Highly functional test, trace and isolate programme —
■ unlimited access to rapid testing and results (symptom onset to test result back with patient in 24hrs; all 
successful contact traced and isolated within next 24 hrs- so an end-to-end process around a given case all completed in 
48hrs) 
1 
 ■ Financial incentives for people needing to isolate — to the extent that the benefits would be comparable to the 
levels they would earn, had they been at work 
■ system capacity for Wales to deal with at least 2000 new cases per day and upto 10,000 contacts from them 
o very clear messaging to communities outlining the roadmap with clear guidance and explanation on why certain 
measures are in place, what benefit will they bring about, how long will those have to be in place, how can the public 
know whether that is working or not? 
4. What options do we have and when do we need to enact them? 
continue with current approach — local and hyper-local lockdowns — they will soon become ineffective 
go for additional national interventions — what are those? when do we enact and how long for? 
what do we do in the longer term? 
Hope that can be of some help 
regards 
Giri 
-----Original Appointment -----

When: 11 October 2020 14:00-15:00 (UTC+00:00) Dublin, Edinburgh, Lisbon, London. 
Where: Microsoft Teams Meeting 
Dear all, forwarding for info. No obligation to join. I'm assuming Huw, Giri and I will definitely be able to join. 
Huw and Giri can you please see what's possible to pull together in advance based on Rob's email. 
Huge thanks, 
Tracey 
Get Outlook for Android 
1 

