Hi Reg, 
Some very well made points, some of which I agree with. The other side of the firebreak needs to 
look different to now re: testing and isolation. 
1. Would welcome sight of the CRM data on who is either isolating/not isolating (not clear on 
where 60-80% has come from). The percentage of people who are asymptomatic differs with studies, 
I think our estimate is 40% - will check. We are trying to do an analysis on how TTP is impacting on R 
— this is quite urgent. 
2. We need people to come forward for testing, and/or have different testing approach, and/or 
have many more easy to use point of care tests (which we don't yet have — these are pipe dreams at 
the moment) we definitely need more people coming forward... something to work on! 
3. We are tracking the RWC, so it is more 'the likely case' rather than the 1 in 10 scenario — 
SAGE/TAG are developing a new RWC. 
4. Agree on financial reward — this is in progress but needs to be delivered. Understand that it 
was delayed due to LA requirements on issuing payments. New policy might also be too restrictive. 
But really needs to be online ASAP. 
5. Would very much welcome sight of a detailed economic argument. .. I think we have been 
missing this. 
I do hope there is a balanced discussion on the all of the potential harms, I'm keen to avoid a clash as 
there are no good answers — every option causes harm. Ultimately though a decision is required, we 
can only highlight what we are observing from a PH perspective and make recommendations based 
upon this. 
Rob 

As our expert scientific advisers, grateful for your private views of this exchange when you have a 
minute. 
Reg Kilpatrick 
Director General, Covid Crisis Coordination 
Cyfarwyddwr Cyffredinol, Cydlynu Argyfwng Covid 
1 
 Welsh Government/Llywodraeth Cymru 
Cathays Park/Parc Cathays 
Cardiff/Caerdydd 
CF10 3NQ 
Irrelevant & Sensitive 
reg.kilpatrick(a)gov.wales 

Hi Andrew 
To see below. On your earlier question about alternatives it is important to start with what is the 
problem we are trying to address. As I see it the problem is transmission of the virus where many who 
transmit are asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic or avoiding isolation requirements (between 60% and 
80% don't self-isolate or quarantine). The way to tackle these issues is to have wider more regular 
testing of people whether symptomatic or not. This approach has been adopted by several 
universities. The other element of the approach needed is paying people to isolate. Independent 
SAGE recommend up to £400 per week. This measure could be backed by more pervasive policing 
of people who don't self-isolate. 
Without the above measures the firebreak won't work and the lost economic activity will have been in 
waste. 
Best wishes 
Huw 
Huw Morris 
Director, Skills, Higher Education and Lifelong Learning/Cyfarwyddwr, Sgiliau, Addysg Uwch a Dysgu Gydol Des 
Welsh Government/Llywodraeth Cymru 
Cathays Park/Part Cathays 
Cardiff/Caerdydd 
CF10 3NQ 
Irrelevant & Sensitive 
/  huw.morris(aDwales.gsi.gov.uk 

I've sent separate comments on the wider economic impact considerations direct to Tom and Andrew 
J, however in relation to Jonathan's email we are under huge pressure from businesses (primarily in 
retail) to explain why we are intending to ask them to close, when they have adapted to become 
Covid secure. They are questioning the basis for this decision and wanting to see the evidence. 
Based on what's set out, as Jonathan highlights, we need to be really clear as to why we are taking 
that decision as we will get lots of kickback from it, particularly if one of the arguments is to prevent 
congregating outdoors outside shops, yet we are allowing outdoor gyms etc. 
Emma 
Emma Watkins 
Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr Polisi Economaidd 
Deputy Director Economic Policy 
Irrelevant & Sensitive 

Tom 
I agree with Andrew's comments. I may have misunderstood but I was surprised by the low impact on R from 
closure of non-essential retail. If this is right, and given the high economic cost and the disproportionate impact 
on lower paid employees, should an option excluding this element be considered? 
I think it is also important to note that the major benefits associated with the firebreak (deaths averted) are based 
on the RWC which I understood (it may have changed) has a probability of not more than 10 per cent. 
The social and economic harms are implicitly assessed on the basis of a central case, so it would also be worth 
including an estimate of the benefits of a firebreak under a central case to ensure a like for like comparison. 
The social and economic harms, including scarring effects, could be much higher under a worse case. 
Jonathan 
Get Outlook for iOS 

Tom, 
1 
 You are doing a remarkable job holding the ring on all of this. 
I really don't want to complicate the job you have in finalising this advice, and I would be grateful for 
Jonathan's input in relation to Annex A and the covering paper, but I think we are understating the negative 
impacts of the firebreak, particularly on the economy and on individuals whose incomes will be reduced and 
long term life chances will be negatively impacted. 
We are in the depths of the deepest recession in history and shutting down large chunks of the economy will 
exacerbate that (impact will be much greater than £100m a week - that is just an estimate of the loss of output 
from the businesses we close, there will also be negative impacts on the wider economy as a result of supply 
chain effects and reduced demand more generally). Some analysts have suggested a firebreak could reduce GDP 
by as much as another 5%. Hopefully we would recover some of that but some of the loss will likely be 
permanent. 
The enhanced JSS is less generous than the JRS that was in place in April/May so individuals in sectors that are 
closing will suffer a bigger negative impact on their incomes (albeit for a shorter period) than previously. 
Looking longer term, worsening the recession increases the negative impacts that will be experienced as a result 
of unemployment and a smaller economy in the future - many people's life chances will be worsened as a result, 
including many more premature deaths. This is likely to be concentrated on young people and on the most 
disadvantaged in society. 
I don't think this changes the recommendation about what to do - based on the advice here Ministers don't 
appear to have any option other than going with some kind of strict firebreak. But I think we need to be clearer 
that the negative impacts are very significant and we are paying a high price for the lives we will save over the 
next few months. 
Cheers 
Andrew 
Get Outlook for iOS 

Helen and LS colleagues - Draft papers for Cabinet for you to consider in relation to supporting legal 
advice. I know I mentioned midday earlier, but think FM wants to see around 11 am if that is still 
doable? 
Other copy recipients — I'm happy to consider focussed tracked changes, particularly where there 
are mistake and errors (of which there will be many!). Not looking for comments on Annex B as these 
have been discussed with FM earlier and there are a lot of different issues. Similarly, I think Annex C 
represents the discussions so far and views from FM and MHSS earlier, so not keen to revisit these if 
possible. 
Tracked changes for any mistakes or errors would be helpful — in particular the main paper and 
Annex D which haven't had much of an airing. Will not have time to address lengthy comments. Any 
digestible feedback by 10:30 I should be able to consider. Will need to get it to the FM shortly after 
11 am so he can clear before it goes to Cabinet members around midday. 
I won't be online until at least 1 Oam so will have to turn things around very quickly — it is much easier 
to consider and accept tracked changes than to think about general comments. ... 
Regards, 
Tom 
Thomas Smithson 
COVID-19 - Project Team 
Llywodraeth Cymru l Welsh Government 
Irrelevant & 

1 
 All, 
I think I've reflected the comments coming in today and the discussions that I'm aware of. Attached is 
a paper summarising the issues that need to be resolved. Grateful for any clarifications or 
adjustments that would be needed on Saturday morning. We will need to submit to the FM by the end 
of the morning to inform a discussion at 2:30pm. 
Grateful for any amends by around 1 1am. 
Regards, 
Tom 
Thomas Smithson 
 COVID-19 - Project Team 
Llywodraeth Cymru / Welsh Government 

All, 
My notes from the discussion earlier today at Cabinet on the firebreak paper that was circulated last 
night and discussed this morning. All members of Cabinet agreed with the principle, subject to further 
work being carried out to offer further reassurances that: 
1. Business support arrangements are all in place 
2. Clarity about what the regime will be after the firebreak and how this is communicated 
3. What the two weeks will be used to do 
1 
 Clearly those need to be worked through at pace and advice provided on each before a formal 
decision is made. The discussion focussed on what a firebreak might look like, having considered and 
discounted alternatives. 
Areas of agreement 
These are the areas I think there was agreement on, based on a shorter, sharper firebreak rather 
than more prolonged but more open version: 
• 2 week firebreak to run from evening of Friday 23 October until Monday 9 November (i.e. 3 
weekends) 
• Stay at home message 
• Broad business closures to be listed in regulations to allow them to access support, including 
non-essential retail and hospitality (unless providing take-away or delivery) 
• Childcare and primary schools to remain open 
• HE to continue face-to-face teaching and blended learning to retain students in the area 
• Adults living alone or single parents living only with their children will be able to join with one other 
household for support — no other household mixing is allowed 
• Encourage parks to stay open for outdoor exercise 
Areas not discussed 
A couple of areas in the papers but not specifically discussed: 
• Assumption that informal childcare will continue to be permitted 
• Assumption that public services and related support services should continue 
• What activities to allow in community centres and places of worship 
• List of reasonable excuses 
Further work and advice needed 
These are the areas that discussion highlighted further work and advice is needed on: 
• Secondary schools — options and a preferred approach needed for schools and exams during 
week 2 of the firebreak. Teachers should be working but questions about what pupils might attend 
and how exams can be managed (resits can potentially be delayed, but others like medical/vet or 
Oxbridge entry cannot) 
• Outdoor activities — whether to prevent / limit gatherings outdoors from the 30 limit and whether to 
allow any organised activity (Halloween, Guy Fawkes night, Remembrance Sunday all in this period). 
• Local government discussions needed on approach to amenities (e.g. by appointment only) and 
whether playgrounds are kept open 
• Decision needed on approach to transport capacity 
New issues 
While not discussed, the stay at home steer means there are new issues to consider (will be many 
others and Liz is picking some of these up): 
• We did not close a number of sectors in the first lockdown — do we adopt a similar approach? 
This includes manufacturing, construction, offices, and others. 
 
 • Assume we want to ensure hotels can open under direction for certain guests (e.g. homeless or 
where essential for key workers or such as construction or healthcare workers)? 
• Assume people working in England would have a reasonable excuse to travel if their employers 
required it 
Regards, 
Tom 
Thomas Smithson 
COVID-19 - Project Team 
Llywodraeth Cymru / Welsh Government 
;Irrelevant & Sensitive; 
-----Original Appointment -----

When: 16 October 2020 08:45-09:30 (UTC+00:00) Dublin, Edinburgh, Lisbon, London. 
Where: Microsoft Teams Meeting 
Irrelevant & Sensitive 
1 

