GUIDANCE ON PRIVATE OFFICE RECORDS 17 June 2009 Introduction 1. This guidance on the management of Private Office records is drafted in terms of "Ministers" but also includes Permanent Secretaries' offices. The original version was issued in April 2001, and revised in June 2004. It drew on and expanded existing guidance which related to various categories of Private Office records. This guidance is intended to supplement and not replace other guidance that has a bearing on the running of Private Offices. 2. The first guidance in this series concentrated on the handling of records once they had been created. The second version of the guidance was extended to deal with the creation of records, namely what needed to be recorded in order, for example, to ensure accountability, to communicate clear decisions for subsequent action. This latest version clarifies one or two aspects and includes some governance requirements. The guidance clearly needs to go on evolving as departmental electronic systems develop and change, therefore it will be kept under review. 3. It is for the Departmental Records Officer (DRO), in consultation with The National Archives (TNA), to agree with Private Offices a period for which it is necessary to keep Private Office records and to see that this guidance is implemented within their departments. Scope 4. This guidance applies to all information which is created in any medium. This includes new web-based technologies such as instant messaging, blackberries and texts. In general, records should be created of all meetings/events which take place with Ministers and/or officials present where decisions are taken on departmental or government policy. Private Offices are here defined as comprising Ministers' and Permanent Secretaries' offices. There is, however, no reason why the records management advice outlined here should not be applied in other offices of senior public servants, for example Director Generals, the Chief Medical Officer, the Chief Nursing Officer, the Chief Scientific Adviser, Agency Chief Executives and Regional Directors. 5. The records of Special Advisers require separate consideration (see paragraph 27). Where Special Advisers have a wider role in the department and have an impact on official business the records originated by a Special Adviser should be retained by the department. If their records only mirror those existing elsewhere in the department there is no reason for them to be kept as part of the official record. All papers that are concerned with party or parliamentary business should be kept separately and managed by the I N0000396684_0001 Special Adviser. Where electronic systems are involved it is for departments to decide how this is best achieved and what controls might need to be introduced. Management of records and information in Private Offices 6. This guidance applies only to records that are created by, held in, or pass through Private Offices and relate to the business activities of the department, in particular those defined as public records under the Public Records Act 1958 (PRA). The PRA places statutory obligations upon departments on the treatment of public records. Other relevant statutory and non-statutory requirements include the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA), the Data Protection Act 1998 (DPA), Environmental Information Regulations 2004 (EIRs) and the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. The Code of Practice under Section 46 of FOIA provides guidance as to the practice which it is desirable for public authorities to follow in connection with the discharge of the functions under the FOIA. 7. Private Offices should adhere to the records management policies and practices adopted by their department and such policies and practices should include procedures specific to Private Offices. This includes accreditation regimes giving assurance in relation to the integrity and availability of information. Departments may also prefer to adapt the format of the guidance to better suit their departmental style, for example, by expressing it in key points briefing. Information in records created or held by Private Offices can, like information in other parts of a department, be the subject of access to information requests under the FOIA, DPA and EIRs. 8. The purpose of putting in place good records and information management procedures is to ensure that records are kept in such a way that: (i) they can readily be retrieved when required (they do not just exist for immediate business use) and to enable, for example, departments to produce as evidence to Inquiries, including any annotations or comments that Ministers may have made; (ii) reduces the risks associated with litigation by making it easier to identify and retrieve relevant information; (iii) ensures accountability and provides an audit trail, which relays the views of the Minister to the appropriate policy area; (iv) allows records to be identified for historical and research purposes; and (v) protects information which is a valuable resource. Records covered by the guidance 9. Records in the following categories are likely to be covered by this 1N0000396684_0002 guidance: (i) letters/minutes from outside the department, eg from Ministers and officials in other departments and from members of the public; (ii) submissions from policy areas; (iii) originals or copies of submissions which have been annotated by a Minister; Private Secretaries' e-mails etc conveying Ministers' views/decisions to policy areas and Private Secretaries' notes of Ministers' meetings and telephone conversations; (iv) records giving information relating to a subject within a Ministers' area of responsibility and which requires a response or decision; (v) copies (and collections) of outgoing correspondence relating to official business (see sub-paragraph 13(viii)); (vi) any documents which may be received and dealt with exclusively by Private Office (see sub-paragraphs 13(i)-(viii)); (vii) Cabinet documents, the handling of which are subject to separate guidance; (viii) Ministers' official diaries and records of meetings with outside interest groups/lobbyists (see sub-paragraphs 13(i) - (ii)); (ix) records of discussions using instant messaging; (x) Private Secretaries' notebooks held in any medium (see sub- paragraph 13(vi)); and (ix) Ministers' notebooks held in any medium (see sub-paragraph 13(vii)). 10. Any constituency and party political records, and those relating to a Minister's personal interests, which are handled by Ministerial Private Offices should be kept separately and are outside the scope of this guidance. Such records should be kept and managed in accordance with Ministers' wishes. Events which need to be recorded course of a Minister's day. In general records should be created of all meetings/events which take place with Ministers and/or officials present where decisions are taken on departmental or government policy and/or there is follow up action required, or where views are expressed which would be helpful to the work of those not present. Records should be created to cover, among other things: (i) ministerial diaries: these should be kept up to date to reflect the actual appointments that took place and this should be the record that is retained; (ii) responses to policy areas and others noting the Minister's decisions and/or views, on official business; (iii) meetings, concerning substantive issues, between: • Ministers and other Ministers; • Ministers and officials, including Special Advisers; • officials and other officials; • other government departments; • dignitaries, foreign or otherwise; • lobby groups; • MPs (other than party political); and • private sector organisations; and (iv) telephone conversations, instant messaging and text discussions that are of an official nature. Events which do not need to be recorded 12. In some instances meetings will be purely informal or of a social nature and no record needs to be created. This category will include the following: (i) regular management meetings with the Minister's Private Office team; (ii) briefing sessions, for example, in relation to Parliamentary Questions and debates, Select Committee appearances, official speeches etc; (iii) telephone conversations or meetings that do not constitute a formal discussion on matters of departmental or government policy but which allow Ministers or officials a confidential space within which to develop ideas or respond to fast moving situations; (iv) party political meetings and/or telephone conversations; (v) meetings and/or telephone conversations to commission work IN0000396684_0004 which is actioned immediately so that, in effect, the result of the action (for example a Press statement) becomes the record; (vi) goodwill visits/hospitality where no policy decisions arise and where the fact of the meeting taking place suffices; and (vii) presentations/seminars where no policy decisions arise. Special categories of records 13. There are some categories of records such as Ministers' official diaries, records of formal meetings with outside interest groups/lobbyists, Private Secretaries' notes, exclusively internal Private Office papers, declined invitations, Ministers' and Private Secretaries' notebooks which Private Offices should manage, for example: (i) Ministers' official diaries: Ministers' official diaries are public records. The final version of each day's engagements must be preserved by the relevant Private Office either in electronic or paper form and passed to the DRO for safekeeping at the end of each year, or at other intervals agreed between the Private Office and the DRO. This reflects the guidance issued by Sir Robin Butler in his letter of 27 September 1995 to Sir Terence Burns in respect of Ministers' diaries. (ii) Records of formal meetings with outside interest groups/lobbyists: records should be kept of the basic facts about formal meetings with outside interest groups. This is in accordance with the government's response to recommendations 27 and 28 of the Sixth Report of the Committee on Standards in Public Life (Cmd 4817). A retention period for these records should be agreed with the DRO. (iii) Sensitive papers: some Private Offices have sensitive non- mainstream internal papers on registered or unregistered files, some of which, for a variety of reasons including sensitivity, will be kept within the Private Office. These records should be passed to the DRO at a mutually agreed time. There may also be occasions where it is not appropriate, for instance for reasons of sensitivity, for the Minister's annotations or comments to be given a wide circulation. In these circumstances a Private Secretary note should be sent, electronically or otherwise, to the policy area recording any action that is needed and the original paper kept in the Private Office. These should be passed in due course to the DRO and subsequently destroyed after an agreed period. (iv) Registered files: in some instances Private Offices may need to keep registered files, either electronically or paper format, and if such files are not kept elsewhere in policy areas, for example on subjects which are not directly supported by the department. I N0000396684_0005 (v) Declined invitations: declined invitations should be kept for a period agreed with the DRO and then destroyed. (vi) Private Secretaries' notebooks: Private Secretaries' notebooks are not public records and should be destroyed after six months. Any detail from notebooks that should be retained should be transferred to the official record. While notebooks are in existence they may be the subject of access to information requests. (vii) Ministers' notebooks: where Ministers' notebooks exist, in any medium, they should be retained and transferred to the DRO at the end of the Minister's tenure. Ministers should be reminded that their notebooks are public records and they are liable to be given in evidence to an Inquiry if so requested and this reflected in the guidance issued by Sir Richard Wilson in his letter of 16 December 1999 to Sir Andrew Turnbull). They may also be the subject of access to information requests. (viii) Copies (and collections) of outgoing correspondence relating to official business: copies of outgoing correspondence held in Private Offices should be destroyed at a time agreed with the DRO. BEST PRACTICE IN MANAGING PRIVATE OFFICE RECORDS 14. The following best practice models have worked well in many departments and it is recommended that all Private Offices should ideally follow one of these models. However, it may on occasion be more practical for Private Offices to adapt one of these models to their own business needs. The model adopted in each department should be agreed with the DRO to ensure that the policy story can be adequately reconstructed to demonstrate accountability. 15. With many departments now operating correspondence tracking systems and an Electronic Records Management (ERM) system, a departmental audit trail may comprise both electronic and paper elements. It is important to ensure that whether the information is held in some form of ERM system or on a digital network that all components of the record are retained. Model 1 - Private Office records kept to support Ministers, and policy areas also required to retain records (see attached Model 1 Handy Hints) 16. This model, which is the recommended approach, relies on Private Offices retaining their own records with policy areas also retaining records. The reason for recommending this model is around risk management and it needs to be clear who is responsible for managing any risk. The reputation of a Minister or Permanent Secretary can be severely damaged if key information is not readily available as evidence of the decision making process. Whilst policy areas need to retain the complete record for evidential I N0000396684_0006 and knowledge management purposes. relying entirely on policy areas to retain all key records poses a major risk to Ministers and senior officials. This model requires both the Private Office and the policy area to ensure that the records are properly captured and stored in the departmental records system. 17. Under this model it is necessary for the Private Offices to ensure that any comments/annotations to submissions and other records are conveyed back to the policy area so that they have a complete picture, whether this information is conveyed electronically or in hard copy will depend on the nature of the original record. Should the Minister examine a submission but make no comment, the Private Office will need to add a note (electronically or in paper as appropriate) to the effect that it has been "seen by the Minister", unless the Minister has already indicated that it has been seen. Ministers need to be sure that they can account for their actions and this could be assisted if Ministers were encouraged to annotate anything that they have read. It is for Private Offices to determine, in agreement with the DRO, whether the originals of any annotated submissions should be retained in the Private Office or returned to the policy area. 18. Private Offices will need to keep a record of any action flowing from, or any comments about, submissions received electronically together with any copies of paper submissions. They also need to transmit electronically a Private Secretary note (or in the case of paper. a copy of the annotated submission) to the policy area recording the response to the submission and any action that is needed. It will be for the policy area to ensure that the whole record is brought together in the electronic corporate file plan. 19. Any records not captured in the departmental records system which are kept in Private Office should be passed into the keeping of the DRO at an agreed time; in the case of Ministerial Private Offices, on a change of Administration. 20. It is important to note that under this model it is not appropriate for Private Offices to weed/dispose of their records, as important documents may be lost. The DRO will conduct any weeding or disposal of records. Model 2 - Reliance on policy areas to retain full and accurate records (see attached Model 2 Handy Hints) 21. This model relies upon the departmental policy areas to ensure that the records are stored in the departmental record system and that where the record includes both electronic and paper elements the whole record is brought together in the corporate filing system by the policy areas. The Private Office, under Model 2, does not need to be concerned about capturing the records that they handle into the departmental records system; rather they delegate this requirement to the responsible policy area. Under this model, however, Private Offices need to have a high degree of confidence that the record management procedures in the relevant policy areas, both within the department and in other departments where there is cross-department working, are sufficiently high. There is the potential for major reputational I N0000396684_0007 •• • • • _• to r- • • • • • - •- s- • •• - • a • S .• • — •• - • IIS S .•• •p — • •—r IS • -• •- •• • —-:• i'• • •- • 1'• • •• • 55 I appropriate. o •- •-• - • ! - • f: disposal •- _• • - 'l'•' • • r- • - • r • •- • and •• •' -•: • •- • -• •— • - • - r r • •, - •, - •- • .r •- • • - r- • - by • • P • • •—• -. • -• -• • • •- •. —• • i'• :5 I 'II - • cI i1iDII ••—. :: • •!'.• • - • a-• _••' — ••.n,: ! !'. • •' Conclusion and Further Guidance 26. If any further advice is required about matters covered in this guidance, this may be obtained from TNA. The guidance will be updated at regular intervals. 27. Other related guidance on matters which are covered in these notes can be found in the: Ministerial Code - and ethi cs/assets/ministerial code. pdf General Election Guidance - and ethi cslassets/• l ectg u i d e. pd f Directory of Civil Service Guidance - and ethi cslassets/csq %20vol l .pdf and ethi cslassets/csq %20vo 12 . pdf Code of Conduct for Special Advisers - and ethics/special advisers/ code/ Cabinet Office/The National Archives 17 June 2009 EXAMPLE PRIVATE OFFICE RECORDS MANAGEMENT DISPOSAL SCHEDULE Minister's Notebooks • Paper volumes *Pass to the DRO at the end • Email (plus attachments) of the Minister's tenure in office. Private Secretaries' • Paper volumes Destroy after 6 months. • Email (plus attachments) Notebooks Engagement Diaries • Paper volumes • Electronic diary, eg MS Outlook, Lotus Notes (including attachments to appointments) • Bespoke diary databases *Pass to the DRO at the end of each year (or other agreed interval), and again at the end of the Minister's tenure in office. Files of correspondence - • Paper • Close ERM folders at the • Registered files to be kept • Electronic versions (held on ERM, end of the Minister's tenure as appropriate including drafts for approval shared drives, personal drives, in office • Pass to the DRO for of wikis, blogs, other email, USB sticks and palm-top) • Capture material at regular permanent preservation or published web content (see intervals from all portable destruction, as agreed media and pass to DRO separate wiki/blog section for on final versions) Outgoing material - • Paper *Retention period to be agreed invitations • Email (plus attachments) (declined/accepted), official with the DRO. letters Incoming material - • Paper • Pass to the DRO at agreed I N Q000396684_0010 invitations; official letters • Electronic versions (held on ERM, intervals (6-12 months) for shared drives, personal drives, destruction email, USB sticks and palm-top) Submissions • Paper • Close ERM folders at the • Pass to the DRO at agreed • Electronic versions (held on ERM, end of tenure intervals (6-12 months) shared drives, personal drives, • Regular downloads from email, USB sticks and palm-top) all portable media • Paper Speeches • Electronic versions (held on ERM, shared drives, personal drives, email, USB sticks and palm-top) • Film/audio/photographs etc • Paper Briefings - events (media, • Electronic versions (held on ERM, meetings, visits) shared drives, personal drives, email, USB sticks and palm-top) • Regular gathering of all • Pass to the DRO at agreed published web content - intervals (6-12 months) including content from non- departmental sites, eg Flickr and YouTube . • Destroy after 6 months Briefings - Ministerial • Paper • Registered files to be kept • Electronic versions (held on ERM, as appropriate I N Q000396684_0011 briefing papers shared drives, personal drives, email, USB sticks and palm-top) Wikis, blogs (Minister, • Paper (transcripts) • Web 2.0 content on official and Permanent Secretary, Chief unofficial government sites, eg Executive etc), internal YouTube video, discussion forums, updates social networking sites and instant messaging etc. • This type of record can be in published format (eg on departmental website or intranet) or official internal communications, blogs etc • Capture material from official/unofficial sites at regular intervals and pass to DRO • See also files of correspondence' for drafts of the published content • Pass to the DRO at agreed intervals • All Minister/Permanent Secretary/Chief Executive content to be passed to the DRO for permanent preservation Minutes of meetings - policy • Paper • Pass to the DRO after 1 • Electronic versions (held on ERM, year shared drives, personal drives, email, USB sticks and palm-top) I N Q000396684_0012 Formal meetings - outside • Paper interest groups/lobbyists • Electronic versions (held on ERM, shared drives, personal drives, email, USB sticks and palm-top) Non-fixed information exchange methods - telephone calls (official business), live web feeds, web chats with Minister etc. Paper (transcripts) • Active gathering is Email (plus attachments) required — advanced Film/audio files preparation, recording etc. Float copies of ' Paper • Electronic versions (held on ERM, correspondence (where shared drives, personal drives, these are still in existence) email, USB sticks and palm-top) *Retention period to be agreed with the DRO. • Record of discussion including significant phone calls to be kept on a registered file • Retention period to be agreed with the DRO Retention period to be agreed with the DRO I N Q000396684_0013 PRIVATE OFFICE - MODEL 1 HANDY HINTS Model 1 requires the Private Office and the policy area to ensure that records are stored in the departmental records system. Records kept outside of the records system should be passed to the Departmental Records Officer at an agreed time. MATERIAL COMING INTO PRIVATE OFFICES Correspondence - from outside the department Submissions - from policy areas Documents • relating to a Minister's area of responsibility that require a response or decision • dealt with exclusively by a Private Office • Cabinet Meetings - concerning substantive issues Telephone conversations - concerning substantive issues Instant Messaging - discussions undertaken Oral briefings Minister's official diaries Discussions on web forums MATERIAL BEING SENT FROM PRIVATE OFFICES Correspondence - outgoing Submissions • that have been annotated by a Minister • note of where seen by a Minister but no comment made Documents • response or decision relating to a Minister's area of responsibility • safekeeping of those dealt with exclusively within Private Office • Cabinet - handled in accordance with instructions Meetings - notes made concerning substantive issues Telephone conversations - records of conversations concerning substantive issues Instant Messaging - record discussions Oral briefings - notes where required Minister's official diaries - corrected to reflect actual appointments that took place Records of discussions on web forums Good records management is needed to ensure that the policy story can be adequately reconstructed to demonstrate accountability. These handy hints are intended to supplement and not replace other guidance that has a bearing on the running of Private Offices. PRIVATE OFFICE - MODEL 2 HANDY HINTS Model 2 requires the policy area to ensure that records are stored in the departmental records system. Copies of records retained for administrative convenience should be sent to the Departmental Records Officer (DRO) or destroyed after a period agreed with the DRO. Records kept outside of the records system should be passed to the DRO at an agreed time MATERIAL COMING INTO PRIVATE OFFICES Correspondence - from outside the department Submissions - from policy areas Documents • relating to a Minister's area of responsibility that require a response or decision • dealt with exclusively by a Private Office • Cabinet Meetings - concerning substantive issues Telephone conversations - concerning substantive issues Instant Messaging - discussions undertaken Oral briefings Minister's official diaries Discussions on web forums MATERIAL BEING SENT FROM PRIVATE OFFICES Correspondence - outgoing Submissions • that have been annotated by a Minister • note of where seen by a Minister but no comment made Documents • response or decision relating to a Minister's area of responsibility • safekeeping of those dealt with exclusively within Private Office • Cabinet - handled in accordance with instructions Meetings - notes made concerning substantive issues Telephone conversations - records of conversations concerning substantive issues Instant Messaging - record discussions Oral briefings - notes where required Minister's official diaries - corrected to reflect actual appointments that took place Records of discussions on web forums Good records management is needed to ensure that the policy story can be adequately reconstructed to demonstrate accountability. These handy hints are intended to supplement and not replace other guidance that has a bearing on the running of Private Offices.