Thanks Frank, a useful summary of where we are from CW. 
I'm not sure I agree with the end-game in-so-far as others see a more refined approach to the end of 
the affair, that is not captured in the current SAGE twin peak model of Imperial (1). Also I'm much 
more inclined to think we need a different narrative of `maximum short term suppression, coupled with 
an aggressive but refined testing, isolation and release strategy'. And that this needs to be done as 
soon as possible... e.g. tomorrow (2-3). 
In effect we need to immediately contain the disease in and within households by, as near as 
possible, eliminating all societal mixing — closure of all non-essential businesses, only one person 
allowed out to food shop or for essential urgent business. Signalling to also reduce household 
contact, hand-washing, cleaning surfaces. If this is done in a collectively agreed short period — with 
an defined end-point (e.g. when new hospital admissions from Wales get to lower than 5 per day and 
a scaled and detailed community testing and control method is in place — perhaps 4-8 weeks, if there 
is compliance). 
The public should be made aware of what `going vertical' looks like for hospitals (see Italy) and that 
they all have major role to play in winning this battle and that the line between success and failure is 
slight. Also signalling that after a short sharp period of intense containment — we will use the 
traditional methods of dealing with communicable disease outbreaks but on a larger scale and with a 
faster pace. Both elements of this would be hard and not guaranteed, but the alternatives of a 
swamped NHS or 18 months of suppression are not easy either. 
Looking at the mutation rate of the current outbreak, whatever we do now we will likely need to do 
again in the future — hopefully, like flu, with mass vaccination programme(s) 
Please feel free to throw stones at this proposed approach, I suspect we will hear more of this 
tomorrow at SAGE.... 
Rob 
 
 
 

Good summary of UK strategy. 
Not for onward distribution please 
F 
Get Outlook for iOS 

dear Catherine, Frank, Michael 
This is my draft piece setup out the strategic goal and tactical pillars and how they fit together. This is to help inform 
No10 thinking. Can you keep it within government for now as I have not yet had it fully cleared (although my SofS v 
happy for me to share with you). 
Chris 
This e-mail and any attachments is intended only for the attention of the addressee(s). Its unauthorised use, 
disclosure, storage or copying is not permitted. If you are not the intended recipient, please destroy all copies 
and inform the sender by return e-mail. Any views expressed in this message are not necessarily those of the 
Department of Health and Social Care. Please note: Incoming and outgoing email messages are routinely 
monitored for compliance with our policy on the use of electronic communications. 
1 

