 
Ysgrifenydd Preifat / Private Secretary 
Lee Waters AS / MS 
Dirprwy Weinidog yr Economi a Thrafnidiaeth 
Deputy Minister for Economy and Transport 
Hapus i gyfathrebu'n Saesneg neu yn y Gymraeg/Happy to communicate in English or Welsh 
 I  I 
 I 

Gret Diolch laRaae~ 
Can you update me re non-essential items once you have received clarification. 
Diolch 
I 
1 
  
Ysgrifenydd Preifat / Private Secretary 
Lee Waters AS / MS 
Dirprwy Weinidog yr Economi a Thrafnidiaeth 
Deputy Minister for Economy and Transport 
Hapus i gyfathrebu'n Saesneg neu yn y Gymraeg/Happy to communicate in English or Welsh 
From ~(OFM  -International Relations) 
Sent: 15 December 2020 16:05 . 
TQPSDeputyM.inister Economy & Transport    (Project Team - C-19) 
 @gov.wales>
Subject: RE: MA/FM/3803/20- Review of post-firebreak restrictions 
I  
Leisure and fitness facilities (gyms, swimming pools, spas, fitness studios) will be closed in Tier 4. 
Supermarkets will be open at all levels as considered essential (though they are of course expected 
to follow the reasonable measures in the guidance to keep people safe). The only restriction on 
supermarkets in Tier 4 could be the sale of non-essential items and I am waiting for clarification on 
this point. 
i  i 

 
Can you help with the below. 
Diolch 
 
Ysgrifenydd Preifat / Private Secretary 
Lee Waters AS / MS 
1 
 Dirprwy Weinidog yr Economi a Thrafnidiaeth 
Deputy Minister for Economy and Transport 
Hapus i gyfathrebu'n Saesneg neu yn y Gymraeg/Happy to communicate in English or Welsh 

Hi — no, not for me sorry.;  should be able to help 
--------------------------------------------------------- }., 

Irrelevant & Sensitive 

Hi James 
The DMfE&T has asked for an update on the below. Would this fall to you if not can you advise who 
would be best placed. 
Diolch 
i ; 
 
Ysgrifenydd Preifat / Private Secretary 
Lee Waters AS / MS 
Dirprwy Weinidog yr Economi a Thrafnidiaeth 
Deputy Minister for Economy and Transport 
Hapus i gyfathrebu'n Saesneg neu yn y Gymraeg/Happy to communicate in English or Welsh 
 

Thank you for your e mail. 
The DM has noted and has asked if an update can be provided on what decision was made on gyms 
in Tier 4 and what gradations of restrictions will apply to supermarkets in different levels please? 
Diolch 
 
 
Ysgrifenydd Preifat / Private Secretary 
Lee Waters AS / MS 
Dirprwy Weinidog yr Economi a Thrafnidiaeth 
Deputy Minister for Economy and Transport 
Hapus i gyfathrebu'n Saesneg neu yn y Gymraeg/Happy to communicate in English or Welsh 

Private offices 
i „ 
CG's office has made me realise that the FM's decisions on this were not fed back to other 
ministers. Apologies for the oversight. 
1. Unlicenced music events — the FM agreed to maintain the option of a £10,000 fixed penalty 
which meets the deterrent the police would prefer, after being satisfied that our legitimate concerns 
for access to justice are met through it being made very clear to recipients of an FPN that they have 
the ability to reject the FPN and argue their case in court, albeit at risk of an unlimited fine. 
2. Penalties for businesses — it was agreed to create a new offence of failure to comply with the 
terms of a Premises Improvement Notice, with an FPN available to LA enforcement officers starting at 
£1000 and rising on subsequent occasions. This was actioned in the Regs that came into force last 
Friday. 
3. Failure to self-isolate following international travel, the FM agreed to reduce the FPN 
value from a fixed £1000 to an initial £500 (rising on subsequent occasions). This would apply to the 
main offence and also to linked offences such as obstructing an enforcement officer in pursuit of this 
offence. This is being actioned in this week's international travel regulations which come into force on 
Saturday morning. 
4. Organising an event of over 15 people indoors or over 30 people outdoors (ie the house 
parties offence) - the FM agreed to increase the FPN value from an initial £200 to an initial £500 
(rising on subsequent occasions). This will be included in next week's Regs introducing the "traffic 
lights" system. Comms are working on materials to announce the increase and emphasise the 
importance of not holding parties. 
5. Penalty for international travel operators failing to give information to travellers — it was 
agreed to reduce this from a fixed £4000 to an initial £1000, rising on subsequent occasions. This is 
being actioned in this week's international travel regulations which come into force on Saturday 
morning. 
6. The FM was not convinced by the argument at para 30, against creating a further offence for 
"reckless" breaches of the general self-isolation requirements, with a higher value FPN that 
equates more closely with the penalty for failure to self-isolate following international travel. He noted 
that this model seemed to work in England and suggested that police officers must be experienced in 
handling cases involving the concept of `recklessness'. We are testing this with stakeholders and will 
come back with further advice. 
1 
 7. Ministers agreed the recommendation of having a systematic review to ensure there is clarity 
about the respective roles and responsibilities of different enforcing authorities for each offence (for 
example ensuring there are no settings where certain regulations are unintentionally not being 
enforced). We are considering how to take this forward. 
8. Ministers also agreed that discussion should take place with all enforcing authorities to ensure 
there is a shared understanding of what offences are most serious in the Covid context, and that the 
law enforcement response is appropriate to the level of seriousness. Again, we are considering how 
to take this forward. 
Thanks very much 
James 
James Gerard 
Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr — Trawsnewid a Datganoli Cyfiawnder / Deputy Director — Justice Transformation and Devolution 
Swyddfa'r Prif Weinidog / Office of the First Minister 
Ll.ywodraeth.C.ym.r / Welsh.Q,overnment 
Irrelevant & Sensitive 
 / : james.gerard llyw.cymru  /  
James 
Ffon / Tel:; I&S 

 
i----.-J 
Apologies for the time it has taken to get you the CG's final views on this — officials have been 
discussing with him through the week. 
On the unlicenced music events, following further information provided to him in light of initial 
questions, the CG's conclusion was that in light of the fact that these generally end up in court, it 
seems to him that we have the option of retaining the £1 Ok fine which meets the deterrent the police 
would prefer, whilst being satisfied that our legitimate concerns for access to justice are met. He is 
therefore content for it to be retained (contrary to the advice in the MA). 
He was content with all the proposals in the review relating to penalties for businesses. 
On penalties relating to failure to self-isolate following international travel, the CG suggested that 
a £200 FPN as proposed felt out of kilter with the levels elsewhere in the UK in a policy area where 
there has been a reasonable amount of consistency, so suggested we reflect the Scottish levels — on 
which basis we would recommend the FPN value is set at £500 (rising on subsequent occasions). 
Finally, as a knock on consequence of the above, we suggested to the CG and he agreed that it 
might be sensible to also increase the penalty for organising an event of over 15 people indoors 
or over 30 people outdoors (ie the house parties offence), so that this too was set at £500. 
The first benefit of making this change is that other than for offences committed by businesses and 
the music events offence, we would have limited ourselves to two scales of penalty: one starting at 
£60 for most offences, and one starting at £500 for the more serious offences. This brings more 
coherence than having one offence only where the scale starts at £200, and a limited number where 
the scale then starts at £500. 
1 
 More important, though, is that we know house parties are continuing to be organised. Last week 
alone Gwent Police report attending 24 (other forces have not given precise numbers). Given the high 
risk of spread at these and current high incidence rates among under 25s, attempting a more 
powerful deterrent appears reasonable, especially to coincide with pubs being closed in evenings, 
which will increase the incentive to organise parties. Comms advise that this would fit well with our 
planned messages for next week and should receive significant coverage, which could be beneficial 
in conveying the dangerousness of holding these events. Legal services agree that this would be 
rational. 
For completeness, the other comments we received on the FPNs review were from the Minister for 
Housing and Local Government who had said "I'm actually happy with all the recommendations set 
out here, they seem to me to be proportionate and they answer some of the concerns I had 
previously expressed about the FPN regime. I particularly welcome the suggested review across all 
enforcement agencies"; and from the Deputy Minister and Chief Whip, who had flagged that Alun 
Michael did not support the case for removing the £10,000 FPN for unlicenced music events. 
When we have the FM's views on these issues, we can include in the regulations to come into force 
next Friday and in the covering MA as necessary. 
Thanks, 
Irrelevant & Sensitive 

------------- -, 
 ----; 
The First Minister has considered this MA. He has agreed to retain the current restrictions, and 
approved the draft Written Statement at doc 2. 
We will respond on the CMO Statement in the morning as that followed later. 
In relation to the review of FPNs at Doc 5, the First Minister does not feel able to agree in principle to 
the amendments proposed, without some further discussion. He has asked for: 
The view of the CG. 
2. Further information on the first proposal on unlicensed music events. Was there something 
earlier in the week about a decision not to invoke any further penalties of this sort in England until the 
issue of court level penalties being awarded is addressed? If that is the case, would it make any 
different to the views of our own police? 
3. The remaining proposals seems less contentious, but he would still rather not proceed without 
Ministerial colleagues having an opportunity to comment. 
Private offices — grateful if you could confirm that Ministers have considered the review of FPN's at 
doc 5 please and send any comments as soon as possible. The First Minister would like to make a 
final decision on Monday. 
1 
 -M..an.vTha.nks..- 
 
Prif Ysgrifennydd Preifat i Brif Weinidog Cymru 
Senior Private Secretary to the First Minister of Wales 
/:   
Importance: High 
Please find attached advice for the First Minister in relation to the first review of the post-firebreak 
restrictions. 
Doc 1-the Statement from the Chief Medical Officer, will follow shortly. 
A Welsh translation of the draft Written Statement will be provided tomorrow. 

;- COVID-19 - Project Team 
Llywodraeth Cymru / Welsh Government 
CF10 3NQ 
Ffon/Tel: Irrelevant & Sensitive 
 Name  
 :  
1 

