We do need a handle on HCW deaths ourselves. 
The decision on what can be shared is then a separate issue we can consider with Heather's guidance I feel. 
cur 
Dr Gillian Richardson, MBChB, MRCGP, MPH, FFPH, MRCPHMI, MlnstLM 
Dr Gill Richardson 
Cynghorydd Proffesiynol i Brif Swyddog Meddygol, 
Cymru, Llywodraeth Cymru. (Secondiwyd o 
Gyfarwyddwr Cynorthwyol, Polisi ac lechyd 
Rhyngwladol, Canolfan Gydweithredol Sefydliad 
lechyd y Byd ar Fuddsoddi ar gyfer lechyd a 
Llesiant). 
lechyd Cyhoeddus Cymru 
Llawr 5 
2 Capital Quarter 
Tyndall Stryd 
Caerdydd 
CF10 4BZ 
Ffo n : i&s Dr Gill Richardson 
Professional Advisor to Chief Medical Officer, Wales, 
Welsh Government. (Seconded from Assistant 
Director, Policy and International Health, World 
Health Collaborating Centre on Investment for 
Health & Well-being). 
Public Health Wales 
Floor 5 
2 Capital Quarter 
Tyndall Street 
Cardiff 
CF10 4BZ 
Phone?.      :i&s
email: GiII.Richardson2(Ewales.nhs.uk 
1 
 ebost:  
www.publicheaIthwales.org 
www.iechydcyhoedduscymru.org 
Rydym yn croesawu gohebiaeth yn Gymraeg. Byddwn yn ymateb yn Gymraeg heb oedi. 
We welcome correspondence in Welsh. We will respond in Welsh without delay. 
GLOBAL 
every"astthild 
INITIAT VE 
Arhoswch! Meddyliwch am yr amgylchedd - oes angen argraffu'r ebost yma? 
Please consider the environment - do you really need to print this email? 

In meeting with Minister where he agreed we hold our line that there is no reporting on NHS staff 
deaths, in Wales, by PHW. 
Could note that PHW are not reporting on overall deaths wrt local authority area (as in England) given 
lower commensurate numbers which can lead to identification. 
(To note that Health Boards are reporting on staff deaths, and in some cases family of deceased NHS 
staff are disclosing details in public domain.) 
Chrishan 
Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr Dros Do (Coronafeirws) / Acting Deputy Director (COVID-19) 
1 
 Adran lechyd Cyhoeddus / Public Health Division 
Grwp lechyd a Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol / Health and Social Services Group 
Llwodraeth Cymru / Welsh Government 
Irrelevant & Sensitive I chrishan.kamalan(gov.wales 

Dear colleagues, 
Peter was also on the call so may have more notes. 
Please note the need for a reply re the plan for reporting of NHS staff deaths 
Also, I highlighted the issue of oxygen in mental health trusts in England in case this also needed consideration in Wales 
Brief notes: 
Deaths/sit rep data: 
Update that death of a patient in the Nightingale facility (London) last night 
England +661 deaths, total 11666 (needs verification still) 
NI +10, total 134 
Scotland +40, total 615 
Wales +60, total 463 
UK + 771 (to be confirmed) total 12878 (needs verification still) 
Staff deaths 
DHSC/PHE are asking the DAs to confirm what they are doing about information about staff number deaths — would 
like an update on this urgently. 
Supply lines 
Very busy, stock sent to LRFs — should be additional drops this week ? exactly when for DAs — likely Friday and Saturday 
this week in England 
Interim 'clipper' supply is up and running but only to a small number of people at present — will take likely 4 weeks until 
fully up and running so still reactive work in interim. 
There have been some issues with gowns (shortages) and some complications with this e.g. wrong types but this is being 
resolved. 
There was a body bag shortage but working hard to get increased supply. 8000 today being distributed today. 
Oxygen issues in some English hospitals e.g. mental health trusts — they do not normally have oxygen supplies so are 
relying on bottled cylinders — important work to ensure continuity of supply in England in mental health trusts 
Social Care 
Action Plan being published this afternoon and launched by Secretary of State at Press Conference — details as discussed 
in notes yesterday 
1 
 Workforce remains a big problem and is part of the action plan 
Comms 
Launch of social care plan today alongside SoS appearance at 5pm 
General comms on differences in data streams and work ongoing on this 
General comms on PPE especially in social care sector 
Ongoing comms on testing including drive-through sites 
John Bell's report on antibody testing to come out today (oxford university) so reactive lines for that 
Best wishes, 
Anna 
Dr Anna Schwappach 
Cofrestrydd Arbenigol lechyd y Cyhoedd/Speciality Registrar in Public Health 
lechyd Cyhoeddus Cymru/ Public Health Wales 
: anna.schwappach(a~wales.nhs.uk 
Rhyngrwyd/Internet: www.iechydcyhoedduscymru.org www.publichealthwales.org 
Rydym yn croesawu gohebiaeth yn Gymraeg. Byddwn yn ymateb yn Gymraeg heb oedi. 
We welcome correspondence in Welsh. We will respond in Welsh without delay. 
Nodwch, os gwelwch yn dda, byddaf yn gweithio Dydd Mawr, Dydd Mercher ac Dydd Iau fel 
arfer 
Please note, my working days are Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday 
Best wishes, 
Anna 
Dr Anna Schwappach 
Cofrestrydd Arbenigol lechyd y Cyhoedd/Speciality Registrar in Public Health 
lechyd Cyhoeddus Cymru/ Public Health Wales 
: anna.schwappach(Dwales.nhs.uk 
Rhyngrwyd/Internet: www.iechydcyhoedduscymru.org www.publichealthwales.org 
Rydym yn croesawu gohebiaeth yn Gymraeg. Byddwn yn ymateb yn Gymraeg heb oedi. 
We welcome correspondence in Welsh. We will respond in Welsh without delay. 
Nodwch, os gwelwch yn dda, byddaf yn gweithio Dydd Mawr, Dydd Mercher ac Dydd Iau fel 
arfer 
Please note, my working days are Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday 

DHSC/PHE/DAs Call 14/4/20 — Brief notes 
Apologies if you have already received some notes from Peter but, in case not.... 
Death data 
England —11005, increase 7744 
Scotland — 575, increase of 9 
Wales — 403, increase of 19 
NI — increase 6 
Working UK figure 12107 — increase 778 
ONS — NHSE difference in data continues e.g. NHSE figures until 3 April — 5186, ONS 5979 — there is a gap between 
them. 
— they think that approx 1/3 of the data gap in deaths from community, 1/3 deaths not picked up/tested in hospitals as 
COVID, 1/3 related to delay. This continues to be discussed and there is a meeting on this this afternoon. Complicated 
problem to unpick. 
They are looking at developing a new process for capturing deaths in HCWs and adult SCWs — this was discussed with 
the DAs at the weekend and is under review. They discussed idea of capturing deaths in these groups: those 
nurses/doctors/HCWs that happen in hospital may be picked up through the normal data channels; identifying new 
ways to capture wider groups such as pharmacists, NHS office staff, dentists when they die in hospital; HCWs and SCWs 
when not dying in hospital. These are all extended and complex groups— will need to work on data sources and verifying 
them before can collect/release this data. 
NHSE/PHE/DHSC working on this now and will be working with colleagues in DAs. 
Wales raised concerns, including regarding accidental identification of people in a small country. Wales advised that they 
will be feeding back on this formally but suggested that they would prefer the use of NHS staff as a bracket for all 
identified HCWs rather than subcategorising further, as had been suggested. Other DAs also said they are continuing to 
review and all agreed that this would continue to be looked at in terms of the best approach going forward. 
Adult Social Care Update 
DHSC have been preparing an action plan over weekend - Confirmation that will be published tomorrow. 
Content in there about improving infections control, support for workforce and support for vulnerable groups e.g. 
expanding testing, supporting discharges, recruitment, training, support for workforce 
Care home deaths from ONS data released today — 217 care home deaths last week (11 day lag so real number will be 
much higher). In the 11 days since the 217 figure, approx. doubling in no. of care homes registering a care home 
outbreak. Approx. 2100 care homes now registering an outbreak — approx. 14% care homes in England. 
Have been requests to include care home deaths in daily data but explained that this is very hard to try and unpick this 
data so that this can happen. 
Chair queried that, looking at home care, home care deaths also appear up at a greater percentage than care homes and 
whether this was significant? DHSC confirmed need for caution when looking at changes in death rates — high 
fluctuations in deaths at home anyway (before COVID) depending on many factors. BUT home care sector is under a 
1 
 huge amount of pressure — very big pressure with staff absences and a lot of other support normally available (e.g. 
visiting services, day centres etc) have been scaled back. They are therefore keeping a close eye on this. 
Testing 
Numbers down again significantly in last report — covers Easter Sunday, therefore not surprising. 
Drop in number of patients tested in hospital is more substantial than the number of staff tested. This could be a good 
sign and could reflect increased capacity now to bring on more staff (adult social care staff testing now being pushed in 
England). Now need to increase demand to fill all the tests now available. Will review numbers again after BH weekend 
lag. 
Considerable problems with antibody testing. No lateral flow test that passed requirements yet. 
Now looking at how could roll out [LISA testing in parallel with looking at antibody testing. 
Also ramping up options for population sampling. 
Good response to requests for help from industry so far. 
Workforce 
Numbers of professionals expressing an interest in returning to work increasing. 
Also, students getting ready to go onto clinical placements. 
However returning staff potentially available in some areas in country not being taken up, perhaps because these areas 
are not experiencing the increase in demand for services yet — encouraging them to think mid-term rather than short-
term only and therefore take up the offer of these staff; messenging with employers in these areas. 
Also ensuring that support being directed to adult social care sector. Workforce on adult social care side is still 
concerning and they are starting a recruitment drive into this service in next 48 hours. 
International 
No-one on the line. Main stand-alone international team has been stood down. 
Comms 
No-one on line 
Death and Funeral guidance 
Current PHE guidance is being split into two so that the guidance on attendance at funerals can be published rapidly 
(end of week) and the rest can be published next week. 
Supply issues 
Shortage of ICU drugs — been notified today. In discussion with CMO. 
Atracurium in short supplies —4 days supply in the system. This is a European supply issue — alternative available is 
rocuronium — also in limited supply. 
Not clear contingency at present. ALERT going out today about this. 
Best wishes, 
Anna 
Dr Anna Schwappach 
Cofrestrydd Arbenigol lechyd y Cyhoedd/Speciality Registrar in Public Health 
lechyd Cyhoeddus Cymru/ Public Health Wales 
:  anna.schwappach(a)-wales.nhs.uk
Rhyngrwyd/Internet:  www.iechydcyhoedduscymru.org www.publichealthwales.o 
Rydym yn croesawu gohebiaeth yn Gymraeg. Byddwn yn ymateb yn Gymraeg heb oedi. 
1 
 We welcome correspondence in Welsh. We will respond in Welsh without delay. 
Nodwch, os gwelwch yn dda, byddaf yn gweithio Dydd Mawr, Dydd Mercher ac Dydd Iau fel 
arfer 
Please note, my working days are Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday 
Sganiwyd y neges hon am bob feirws hysbys wrth iddi adael Llywodraeth Cymru. Mae Llywodraeth Cymru yn 
cymryd o ddifrif yr angen i ddiogelu eich data. Os cysylltwch a Llywodraeth Cymru, mae ein hysbysiad 
preifatrwydd  yn esbonio sut rydym yn defnyddio eich gwybodaeth a sut rydym yn diogelu eich preifatrwydd. 
Rydym yn croesawu gohebiaeth yn Gymraeg. Byddwn yn anfon ateb yn Gymraeg i ohebiaeth a dderbynnir yn 
Gymraeg ac ni fydd gohebu yn Gymraeg yn arwain at oedi. On leaving the Welsh Government this email was 
scanned for all known viruses. The Welsh Government takes the protection of your data seriously. If you 
contact the Welsh Government then our Privacy Notice explains how we use your information and the ways in 
which we protect your privacy. We welcome receiving correspondence in Welsh. Any correspondence received 
in Welsh will be answered in Welsh and corresponding in Welsh will not lead to a delay in responding. 
1 

