GUIDANCE ON PRIVATE OFFICE RECORDS
17 June 2009

Introduction

1. This guidance on the management of Private Office records is drafted
in terms of "Ministers" but also includes Permanent Secretaries’ offices. The
original version was issued in April 2001, and revised in June 2004. It drew
on and expanded existing guidance which related to various categories of
Private Office records. This guidance is intended to supplement and not
replace other guidance that has a bearing on the running of Private Offices.

2. The first guidance in this series concentrated on the handling of
records once they had been created. The second version of the guidance
was extended to deal with the creation of records, namely what needed to be
recorded in order, for example, to ensure accountability, to communicate clear
decisions for subsequent action. This latest version clarifies one or two
aspects and includes some governance requirements. The guidance clearly
needs to go on evolving as departmental electronic systems develop and
change, therefore it will be kept under review.

3. lt is for the Departmental Records Officer (DRO), in consultation with
The National Archives (TNA), to agree with Private Offices a period for which
it is necessary to keep Private Office records and to see that this guidance is
implemented within their departments.

Scope

4. This guidance applies to all information which is created in any
medium. This includes new web-based technologies such as instant
messaging, blackberries and texts. In general, records should be created of
all meetings/events which take place with Ministers and/or officials present
where decisions are taken on departmental or government policy. Private
Offices are here defined as comprising Ministers’ and Permanent Secretaries’
offices. There is, however, no reason why the records management advice
outlined here should not be applied in other offices of senior public servants,
for example Director Generals, the Chief Medical Officer, the Chief Nursing
Officer, the Chief Scientific Adviser, Agency Chief Executives and Regional
Directors.

5. The records of Special Advisers require separate consideration (see
paragraph 27). Where Special Advisers have a wider role in the department
and have an impact on official business the records originated by a Special
Adviser should be retained by the department. If their records only mirror
those existing elsewhere in the department there is no reason for them to be
kept as part of the official record. All papers that are concerned with party or
parliamentary business should be kept separately and managed by the

INQ000396684_0001

Special Adviser. Where electronic systems are involved it is for departments
to decide how this is best achieved and what controls might need to be
introduced.

Management of records and information in Private Offices

6. This guidance applies only to records that are created by, held in, or
pass through Private Offices and relate to the business activities of the
department, in particular those defined as public records under the Public
Records Act 1958 (PRA). The PRA places statutory obligations upon
departments on the treatment of public records. Other relevant statutory and
non-statutory requirements include the Freedom of Information Act 2000
(FOIA), the Data Protection Act 1998 (DPA), Environmental Information
Regulations 2004 (EIRs) and the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
The Code of Practice under Section 46 of FOIA provides guidance as to the
practice which it is desirable for public authorities to follow in connection with
the discharge of the functions under the FOIA.

7. Private Offices should adhere to the records management policies and
practices adopted by their department and such policies and practices should
include procedures specific to Private Offices. This includes accreditation
regimes giving assurance in relation to the integrity and availability of
information. Departments may also prefer to adapt the format of the guidance
to better suit their departmental style, for example, by expressing it in key
points briefing. Information in records created or held by Private Offices can,
like information in other parts of a department, be the subject of access to
information requests under the FOIA, DPA and EIRs.

8. The purpose of putting in place good records and_ information
management procedures is to ensure that records are kept in such a way that:

(i) they can readily be retrieved when required (they do not just
exist for immediate business use) and to enable, for example,
departments to produce as evidence to Inquiries, including any
annotations or comments that Ministers may have made;

(ii) reduces the risks associated with litigation by making it easier to
identify and retrieve relevant information;

(iii) |§ ensures accountability and provides an audit trail, which relays
the views of the Minister to the appropriate policy area;

(iv) allows records to be identified for historical and research
purposes; and

(v) protects information which is a valuable resource.
Records covered by the guidance

9. Records in the following categories are likely to be covered by this

INQ000396684_0002

guidance:

(i) letters/minutes from outside the department, eg from Ministers
and officials in other departments and from members of the public;

(ii) submissions from policy areas;

(iii) | originals or copies of submissions which have been annotated
by a Minister; Private Secretaries’ e-mails etc conveying Ministers’
views/decisions to policy areas and Private Secretaries’ notes of
Ministers’ meetings and telephone conversations;

(iv) records giving information relating to a subject within a Ministers’
area of responsibility and which requires a response or decision;

(v) copies (and collections) of outgoing correspondence relating to
official business (see sub-paragraph 13(viii));

(vi) any documents which may be received and dealt with
exclusively by Private Office (see sub-paragraphs 13(i)-(viii));

(vii) Cabinet documents, the handling of which are subject to
separate guidance;

(viii) Ministers’ official diaries and records of meetings with outside
interest groups/lobbyists (see sub-paragraphs 137(i) - (ii));

(ix) records of discussions using instant messaging;

(x) Private Secretaries’ notebooks held in any medium (see sub-
paragraph 13(vi)); and

(ix) Ministers’ notebooks held in any medium (see sub-paragraph
13(vii)).

10. Any constituency and party political records, and those relating to a
Minister’s personal interests, which are handled by Ministerial Private Offices
should be kept separately and are outside the scope of this guidance. Such
records should be kept and managed in accordance with Ministers’ wishes.

Events which need to be recorded

11. In many instances Private Offices will be dealing with correspondence
and submissions which have been created by others and submitted to the
Minister for advice, for action or for briefing. It is necessary in these cases for
the Private Office to record by some means the Minister's response so that
this becomes part of the audit trail. The records that need to be created by
the Private Office will largely be concerned with the meetings and telephone
conversations relating to official business that take place during the normal

INQ000396684_0003

course of a Ministers day. In general records should be created of all
meetings/events which take place with Ministers and/or officials present
where decisions are taken on departmental or government policy and/or there
is follow up action required, or where views are expressed which would be
helpful to the work of those not present. Records should be created to cover,
among other things:

(i) ministerial diaries: these should be kept up to date to reflect the
actual appointments that took place and this should be the record that
is retained;

(ii) responses to policy areas and others noting the Minister’s
decisions and/or views, on official business;

(iii) = meetings, concerning substantive issues, between:
e Ministers and other Ministers;
Ministers and officials, including Special Advisers;
officials and other officials;
other government departments;
dignitaries, foreign or otherwise;
lobby groups;
MPs (other than party political); and
private sector organisations; and

(iv) telephone conversations, instant messaging and_ text
discussions that are of an official nature.

Events which do not need to be recorded

12. In some instances meetings will be purely informal or of a social nature
and no record needs to be created. This category will include the following:

(i) regular management meetings with the Minister's Private Office
team;

(ii) briefing sessions, for example, in relation to Parliamentary
Questions and debates, Select Committee appearances, official
speeches etc;

(iii) telephone conversations or meetings that do not constitute a
formal discussion on matters of departmental or government
policy but which allow Ministers or officials a confidential space
within which to develop ideas or respond to fast moving
situations;

(iv) party political meetings and/or telephone conversations;

(v) meetings and/or telephone conversations to commission work

INQ000396684_0004

which is actioned immediately so that, in effect, the result of the
action (for example a Press statement) becomes the record;

(vi) goodwill visits/hospitality where no policy decisions arise and
where the fact of the meeting taking place suffices; and

(vii) presentations/seminars where no policy decisions arise.
Special categories of records

13. There are some categories of records such as Ministers’ official diaries,
records of formal meetings with outside interest groups/obbyists, Private
Secretaries’ notes, exclusively internal Private Office papers, declined
invitations, Ministers’ and Private Secretaries’ notebooks which Private Offices
should manage, for example:

(i) Ministers’ official diaries: Ministers’ official diaries are public
records. The final version of each day's engagements must be
preserved by the relevant Private Office either in electronic or paper
form and passed to the DRO for safekeeping at the end of each year,
or at other intervals agreed between the Private Office and the DRO.
This reflects the guidance issued by Sir Robin Butler in his letter of 27
September 1995 to Sir Terence Burns in respect of Ministers’ diaries.

(ii) Records of formal meetings with outside _ interest
groups/lobbyists: records should be kept of the basic facts about
formal meetings with outside interest groups. This is in accordance
with the government's response to recommendations 27 and 28 of the
Sixth Report of the Committee on Standards in Public Life (Cmd 4817).
A retention period for these records should be agreed with the DRO.

(iii) Sensitive papers: some Private Offices have sensitive non-
mainstream internal papers on registered or unregistered files, some of
which, for a variety of reasons including sensitivity, will be kept within
the Private Office. These records should be passed to the DRO ata
mutually agreed time. There may also be occasions where it is not
appropriate, for instance for reasons of sensitivity, for the Minister's
annotations or comments to be given a wide circulation. In these
circumstances a Private Secretary note should be sent, electronically
or otherwise, to the policy area recording any action that is needed and
the original paper kept in the Private Office. These should be passed
in due course to the DRO and subsequently destroyed after an agreed
period.

(iv) Registered files: in some instances Private Offices may need
to keep registered files, either electronically or paper format, and if
such files are not kept elsewhere in policy areas, for example on
subjects which are not directly supported by the department.

INQ000396684_0005

(v) Declined invitations: declined invitations should be kept for a
period agreed with the DRO and then destroyed.

(vi) Private Secretaries’ notebooks: Private Secretaries’
notebooks are not public records and should be destroyed after six
months. Any detail from notebooks that should be retained should be
transferred to the official record. While notebooks are in existence they
may be the subject of access to information requests.

(vil) Ministers’ notebooks: where Ministers’ notebooks exist, in any
medium, they should be retained and transferred to the DRO at the end
of the Minister's tenure. Ministers should be reminded that their
notebooks are public records and they are liable to be given in
evidence to an Inquiry if so requested and this reflected in the guidance
issued by Sir Richard Wilson in his letter of 16 December 1999 to Sir
Andrew Turnbull). They may also be the subject of access to
information requests.

(viii) Copies (and collections) of outgoing correspondence
relating to official business: copies of outgoing correspondence held
in Private Offices should be destroyed at a time agreed with the DRO.

BEST PRACTICE IN MANAGING PRIVATE OFFICE RECORDS

14. The following best practice models have worked well in many
departments and it is recommended that all Private Offices should ideally
follow one of these models. However, it may on occasion be more practical
for Private Offices to adapt one of these models to their own business needs.
The model adopted in each department should be agreed with the DRO to
ensure that the policy story can be adequately reconstructed to demonstrate
accountability.

15. With many departments now operating correspondence tracking
systems and an Electronic Records Management (ERM) system, a
departmental audit trail may comprise both electronic and paper elements. It
is important to ensure that whether the information is held in some form of
ERM system or on a digital network that all components of the record are
retained.

Model 1 - Private Office records kept to support Ministers, and policy
areas also required to retain records (see attached Model 1 Handy Hints)

16. This model, which is the recommended approach, relies on Private
Offices retaining their own records with policy areas also retaining records.
The reason for recommending this model is around risk management and it
needs to be clear who is responsible for managing any risk. The reputation of
a Minister or Permanent Secretary can be severely damaged if key
information is not readily available as evidence of the decision making
process. Whilst policy areas need to retain the complete record for evidential

INQ000396684_0006

and knowledge management purposes, relying entirely on policy areas to
retain all key records poses a major risk to Ministers and senior officials. This
model requires both the Private Office and the policy area to ensure that the
records are properly captured and stored in the departmental records system.

17. Under this model it is necessary for the Private Offices to ensure that
any comments/annotations to submissions and other records are conveyed
back to the policy area so that they have a complete picture, whether this
information is conveyed electronically or in hard copy will depend on the
nature of the original record. Should the Minister examine a submission but
make no comment, the Private Office will need to add a note (electronically or
in paper as appropriate) to the effect that it has been “seen by the Minister’,
unless the Minister has already indicated that it has been seen. Ministers
need to be sure that they can account for their actions and this could be
assisted if Ministers were encouraged to annotate anything that they have
read. It is for Private Offices to determine, in agreement with the DRO,
whether the originals of any annotated submissions should be retained in the
Private Office or returned to the policy area.

18. Private Offices will need to keep a record of any action flowing from, or
any comments about, submissions received electronically together with any
copies of paper submissions. They also need to transmit electronically a
Private Secretary note (or in the case of paper, a copy of the annotated
submission) to the policy area recording the response to the submission and
any action that is needed. It will be for the policy area to ensure that the
whole record is brought together in the electronic corporate file plan.

19. Any records not captured in the departmental records system which
are kept in Private Office should be passed into the keeping of the DRO at an
agreed time; in the case of Ministerial Private Offices, on a change of
Administration.

20. It is important to note that under this model it is not appropriate for
Private Offices to weed/dispose of their records, as important documents may
be lost. The DRO will conduct any weeding or disposal of records.

Model 2 - Reliance on policy areas to retain full and accurate records
(see attached Model 2 Handy Hints)

21. This model relies upon the departmental policy areas to ensure that the
records are stored in the departmental record system and that where the
record includes both electronic and paper elements the whole record is
brought together in the corporate filing system by the policy areas. The
Private Office, under Model 2, does not need to be concerned about capturing
the records that they handle into the departmental records system; rather they
delegate this requirement to the responsible policy area. Under this model,
however, Private Offices need to have a high degree of confidence that the
record management procedures in the relevant policy areas, both within the
department and in other departments where there is cross-department
working, are sufficiently high. There is the potential for major reputational

INQ000396684_0007

damage if records are not available to justify the decision making process.
Relying on Model 2 in effect delegates the risk management to the policy
areas but the risk remains to be handled and again it needs to be clear who is
responsible for managing that risk.

22. The Private Office may decide to retain copies of the records for
administrative convenience. As they are copies they should be deleted in an
appropriate manner or weeded and destroyed after a period agreed with the
DRO, or be sent to the DRO to delete/weed/dispose of as appropriate. For
this purpose the DRO may draw up what is known as a ‘Disposal Schedule’
(see example below). In the case of Ministerial Private Offices, for example,
the disposal arrangements agreed with the DRO could be for records to be
deleted in an appropriate manner or destroyed on a change of Administration.
It should be noted that TNA are taking forward work on developing standard
retention periods for Private Office records. Disposal Schedules are different
to, and do not replace, such measures as the automatic deletion of e-mails
after a given period.

23. The Private Office will, however, need to convey any comments made
by the Minister, written or oral, to the relevant policy area to complete the
record. This may be done by scanning annotations and returning them
electronically to the policy area or, in the case of a paper record, returning the
annotated paper copy to the policy area. Should the Minister examine a
submission but make no comment, an electronic note (or in the case of paper,
a manuscript note) should be added that it has been ‘seen by the Minister’
unless the Minister has marked the document to indicate that the document
has been seen. Ministers need to be sure that they can account for their
actions and this may be assisted if Ministers are encouraged to annotate
anything that they have read.

24. There may be some subjects which are dealt with solely by the
Minister. In these cases it will be necessary for Private Offices to keep their
own registered files. These should be passed to the DRO after an agreed
time.

Governance Arrangements

25. Private Offices need to ensure, in consultation with their DRO, that
proper records management procedures are in place, by using one of the
models of good practice outlined above. In recognition of the fast turnover of
staff within Private Offices, this guidance needs to be included in the induction
notes for Private Office staff. In addition the DRO will need to include within
their records management audit procedures, checks to ensure that the
guidance is being followed in their department and it is for individual
departments to determine the most efficient and effective manner this can be
achieved. One possible method is for the DRO to undertake an annual
assessment of the procedures in each Private Office. Where Model 2 is
adopted it is strongly advised that such an assessment is undertaken.

INQ000396684_0008

Conclusion and Further Guidance

26. ‘If any further advice is required about matters covered in this guidance,
this may be obtained from TNA. The guidance will be updated at regular
intervals.

2/. Other related guidance on matters which are covered in these notes
can be found in the:

Ministerial Code -

http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/media/cabinetoffice/propriety_and_ethi
cs/assets/ministerial_code.pdf

General Election Guidance -
http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/media/cabinetoffice/propriety_and_ethi
cs/assets/electquide.pdf

Directory of Civil Service Guidance -
http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/media/cabinetoffice/propriety_and_ethi
cs/assets/csq%20vol1.pdf
http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/media/cabinetoffice/propriety_and_ethi
cs/assets/csq%20vol2.pdf

Code of Conduct for Special Advisers -
http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/propriety and _ethics/special_advisers/
code/code.aspx

Cabinet Office/The National Archives
17 June 2009

INQ000396684_0009

EXAMPLE PRIVATE OFFICE RECORDS MANAGEMENT
DISPOSAL SCHEDULE

Minister's Notebooks

Paper volumes
Email (plus attachments)

*Pass to the DRO at the end
of the Minister's tenure in
office.

Private Secretaries’

Notebooks

Paper volumes
Email (plus attachments)

Destroy after 6 months.

Engagement Diaries

Paper volumes

Electronic diary, eg MS Outlook,
Lotus Notes (including attachments
to appointments)

Bespoke diary databases

*Pass to the DRO at the end
of each year (or other agreed
interval), and again at the end
of the Minister’s tenure in
office.

Files of correspondence -
including drafts for approval
of wikis, blogs, other
published web content (see
separate wiki/blog section

for on final versions)

Paper

Electronic versions (held on ERM,
shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)

Close ERM folders at the
end of the Minister's tenure
in office

Capture material at regular
intervals from all portable
media and pass to DRO

e Registered files to be kept
as appropriate

e Pass to the DRO for
permanent preservation or
destruction, as agreed

Outgoing material -
invitations
(declined/accepted), official
letters

Paper
Email (plus attachments)

*Retention period to be agreed
with the DRO.

Incoming material -

Paper

« Pass to the DRO ait agreed

INQ000396684_0010

invitations; official letters

Electronic versions (held on ERM,
shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)

intervals (6-12 months) for
destruction

Submissions

Paper

Electronic versions (held on ERM,
shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)

Close ERM folders at the
end of tenure

Regular downloads from
all portable media

Pass to the DRO at agreed
intervals (6-12 months)

Speeches

Paper

Electronic versions (held on ERM,
shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)
Film/audio/photographs etc

Regular gathering of all
published web content -
including content from non-
departmental sites, eg
Flickr and YouTube .

Pass to the DRO at agreed
intervals (6-12 months)

Briefings - events (media,

meetings, visits)

Paper

Electronic versions (held on ERM,
shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)

Destroy after 6 months

Briefings - Ministerial

Paper
Electronic versions (held on ERM,

Registered files to be kept
as appropriate

INQ000396684_0011

briefing papers

shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)

Pass to the DRO at agreed
intervals

Wikis, blogs (Minister,

Permanent Secretary, Chief

Executive etc), internal

updates

Paper (transcripts)

Web 2.0 content on official and
unofficial government sites, eg
YouTube video, discussion forums,
social networking sites and instant
messaging etc.

This type of record can be
in published format (eg on
departmental website or

intranet) or official internal

communications, blogs etc.

Capture material from
official/unofficial sites at
regular intervals and pass
to DRO

See also ‘files of
correspondence’ for drafts
of the published content

All Minister/Permanent
Secretary/Chief Executive
content to be passed to
the DRO for permanent
preservation

Minutes of meetings - policy

Paper

Electronic versions (held on ERM,
shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)

Pass to the DRO after 1
year

INQ000396684_0012

Formal meetings - outside
interest groups/lobbyists

Paper

Electronic versions (held on ERM,
shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)

*Retention period to be agreed
with the DRO.

Non-fixed information
exchange methods -
telephone calls _— (official

business), live web feeds,

web chats with Minister etc.

Paper (transcripts)
Email (plus attachments)
Film/audio files

Active gathering is
required — advanced
preparation, recording etc.

« Record of discussion
including significant phone
calls to be kept on a
registered file

e Retention period to be
agreed with the DRO

Float

correspondence

copies of
(where
these are still in existence)

Paper

Electronic versions (held on ERM,
shared drives, personal drives,
email, USB sticks and palm-top)

* Retention period to be
agreed with the DRO

INQ000396684_0013

PRIVATE OFFICE - MODEL 1 HANDY HINTS

Model 1 requires the Private Office and the policy area to ensure that records are stored
in the departmental records system. Records kept outside of the records system should

be passed to the Departmental Records Officer at an agreed time.

MATERIAL COMING INTO PRIVATE

OFFICES
Correspondence - from outside the
department

Submissions - from policy areas
Documents

e relating to a Minister's area of
responsibility that require a response
or decision

dealt with exclusively by a Private
Office

e Cabinet

Meetings - concerning substantive
issues

Telephone conversations - concerning
substantive issues

Instant Messaging - discussions
undertaken

Oral briefings
Minister’s official diaries

Discussions on web forums

MATERIAL BEING SENT FROM

PRIVATE OFFICES
Correspondence - outgoing

Submissions

e that have been annotated by a
Minister

e note of where seen by a Minister but
no comment made

Documents

e response or decision relating to a
Minister’s area of responsibility

safekeeping of those dealt with
exclusively within Private Office

Cabinet - handled in accordance with
instructions

Meetings - notes made concerning
substantive issues

Telephone conversations - records of
conversations concerning substantive
issues

Instant Messaging - record discussions
Oral briefings - notes where required

Minister’s official diaries - corrected to
reflect actual appointments that took
place

Records of discussions on web
forums

Good records management is needed to ensure that the policy story can be adequately
reconstructed to demonstrate accountability. These handy hints are intended to

supplement and not replace other guidance that has a bearing on the running of Private
Offices.

INQ000396684_0014


PRIVATE OFFICE - MODEL 2 HANDY HINTS

Model 2 requires the policy area to ensure that records are stored in the departmental

records system. Copies of records retained for administrative convenience should be

sent to the Departmental Records Officer (DRO) or destroyed after a period agreed with

the DRO. Records kept outside of the records system should be passed to the DRO at

an agreed time

MATERIAL COMING INTO PRIVATE
OFFICES

Correspondence - from outside the
department

Submissions - from policy areas
Documents

e relating to a Ministers area of
responsibility that require a response
or decision

dealt with exclusively by a Private
Office

e Cabinet

Meetings -
issues

concerning substantive

Telephone conversations - concerning
substantive issues

Instant Messaging - discussions

undertaken

Oral briefings

Minister’s official diaries

Discussions on web forums

MATERIAL BEING SENT FROM
PRIVATE OFFICES

Correspondence - outgoing
Submissions

e that have been annotated by a
Minister

note of where seen by a Minister but
no comment made

Documents

e response or decision relating to a
Minister's area of responsibility

safekeeping of those dealt with
exclusively within Private Office

Cabinet - handled in accordance with
instructions

Meetings - notes made _ concerning
substantive issues

Telephone conversations - records of
conversations concerning substantive
issues

Instant Messaging - record discussions
Oral briefings - notes where required

Minister’s official diaries - corrected to
reflect actual appointments that took
place

Records of discussions on web

forums

Good records management is needed to ensure that the policy story can be adequately
reconstructed to demonstrate accountability. These handy hints are intended to
supplement and not replace other guidance that has a bearing on the running of Private

Offices.

INQ000396684_0015

