Message

From: |__Name Redacted —_@dhsc.gov.uk]

Sent: 05/02/2020 18:06:38

To: Atherton, Frank (HSS - Chief Medical Officer) [frank.atherton@gov.wales]; Catherine.Calderwood@gov.scot;
Michael.McBride@health-ni.gov.uk

cc: Whitty, Chris [Chris. Whitty@dhsc.gov.uk]

Subject: CMO coronavirus briefing for DsPH

Hi all

As promised on the UK CMOs call earlier, here is a rough write up of Chris’ call with the Directors of Public
Health.

...Best wishes

i: NR:

CMO coronavirus briefing for DSPH
Fri 31 Jan 2020
0900-0930

e CMO outlined currently epidemiology of outbreak and described two scenarios and how there is the
potential for a situation in which we would move from containment to mitigation (but this is not the case now).
We are currently using pandemic flu for reasonable worst case scenario planning

Q&A:

fe) CMO confirmed that the pandemic flu model was being used for the time being.

fe) CMO confirmed that we do not yet know if surviving infection protects against re-infection

fe) CMO confirms NERVTAG will issue advice on treatment options (currently considering options)
fe) CMO agrees that planning for mitigation now is wise

e CMO updated on the plane bringing people back from China and changes to geographical case

definition and clinical case definition

Q&A:

fe) DCMO agrees to communicate to Comms colleagues that detail of comms must be appropriate to
listening environment

fe) Callers flag universities, boarding schools, Chinese community in UK as recipient groups for comms,
and concern for community cohesion (comms to general public)

fe) Specific request from the North East for information for the public about ‘quarantine’ and better centrally

led comms in relation to the housing of repatriated individuals in the Wirral and choice of location - DCMO
commits to pick up in another call and flag this with DHSC colleagues

fe) DCMO commits to share information imparted in the call with the participants via email (promoted by
questions about the changes to case definitions)

Head of Office to the Chief Medical Officer
Department --39. Victoria. St..Landon, SW1H OEU
of Health & i Name Redacted { ov.uk

Social Care Th eS

WV @cmo England

INQ000383585_0001

DH recipients please note: this email will not be saved by CMO Private Office. If you need this for audit purposes, please
keep a copy for your records.

This e-mail and any attachments is intended only for the attention of the addressee(s). Its unauthorised use,
disclosure, storage or copying is not permitted. If you are not the intended recipient, please destroy all copies
and inform the sender by return e-mail. Any views expressed in this message are not necessarily those of the
Department of Health and Social Care. Please note: Incoming and outgoing email messages are routinely
monitored for compliance with our policy on the use of electronic communications.

INQ000383585_0002
