Gweithio'n well

SIRO NOTICE Improving how we work

Senior Information Risk Owner
2020/001

Social Media
SIRO NOTICES

SIRO Notices are Welsh Government notices of organisation wide changes to security

related procedures that must be adopted by all Divisions. Deputy Directors are required to
confirm, through their Directors, that the changes have been implemented in their areas via
the annual Internal Control Questionnaire.

In the last fortnight, Welsh Government responded to a serious staffing and security incident
over social media use. The First Minister subsequently requested an urgent review of Welsh
Government social media use. Annex 1 details the incident and includes a well-publicised
social media incident involving Wales Office.

Welsh Government Social Media Accounts (see Annex 2 for the full list)

Whilst SIRO notices are usually reserved for changes to security procedures, the investigation
has shown poor practice that breaches policy in a number of areas. Consequently, with
immediate effect:

e All use of Welsh Government social media accounts (Annex 2) must only take place
using Welsh Government owned devices. All use of the accounts from personally
owned devices will cease.

e No member of staff is permitted to change the registered email address associated with
a Welsh Government social media account to a personally owned email address.

e Any Welsh Government social media password details that have been shared with third
parties must be changed immediately. Third parties must not have access to
passwords for Welsh Government social media accounts.

e Two factor authentication must be activated for all Welsh Government social media
accounts where it is an option that can be configured.

Personally Owned Social Media Accounts

As a Welsh Government employee you must ensure that your activity on social media does
not bring the Welsh Government in to disrepute. This responsibility is included in the Civil
Service Code and our Security Policy along with details about commenting on politically
sensitive matters in a private capacity.

Many members of staff regularly use their personal social media accounts for sharing or liking
content which promotes the work of the Welsh Government. We do not wish to stop this
activity, however, staff are reminded that any content that they post and their activity on these
platforms is publically viewable.

It is apparent that a significant number of staff are using personally owned social media

accounts to promote their role or activity as a Welsh Government employee.

GWASANAETH SIFIL LLYWODRAETH CYMRU WELSH GOVERNMENT CIVIL SERVICE

Cefnogi Gweinidogion | Supporting Ministers Cyflawni a Rhagoriaeth

i Gyflawni dros Gymru | to Deliver for Wales Delivery and Excellence

INQ000396686_0001

Gweithio'n well
Improving how we work

Line managers must not persuade or pressure staff in to using personal accounts to promote
Welsh Government business.

lf | had a personal Twitter account and followed the poor pattern of some, my account profile
might read something like:
The below is an example of bad practice

‘Director Human Resources, Welsh Government. Tweets are my own views’.

Clearly, if | tweeted or liked a discriminatory or offensive post, the ‘caveat’ that tweets are
personal views is irrelevant as they would be incompatible with my role and bring the Welsh
Government in to disrepute.

Because of the widespread use of social media in this way, | am asking members of staff to
get in touch before the 28/02/20 if they are using personally owned and managed accounts
as part of their role or to communicate their work. Once we have this information, we will work
with them to understand how these accounts are being used. Individual staff members must
provide these details to the Security Policy mailbox by 28/02/20.

The Digital Communications team will review these accounts and work with owners to
determine whether they should be operated as official Welsh Government accounts.

Where this isn’t appropriate or if staff wish to retain control of the personal account on
their own device, the advice is that you remove anything that may suggest that
you work for the Welsh Government. This advice is not mandatory but not doing so
by 28/02/20 means that you continue at your own risk. If you do not follow the advice
and inappropriate activity is identified on your personal account (such as the example
in Annex 1), you will be referred to HR for consideration of disciplinary action. As the
case study shows, the targeting of individuals doesn’t just happen to other people, it
has happened to a colleague. Your risk profile is naturally higher if your role is in an
area that is of interest to lobbyists, is high profile or senior.

LinkedIn

A key element of the social media profile on the LinkedIn platform is your current role and
employer and so you may use your work email address for LinkedIn registration. A large
number of staff use it to communicate their work and aid professional development. We are
not suggesting that you do not use LinkedIn, however you should ensure you meet your
responsibilities within the Civil Service Code.

Please be aware that the terms and conditions of LinkedIn gives the platform the right to use
and reproduce any content posted. You must not post any material on LinkedIn that you
would not want to see posted verbatim in the media and attributed personally to you.
Remember that you must never put your security vetting status on social media.

WhatsApp
My team regularly receive requests to use WhatsApp on Welsh Government phones. A
summary of our position on WhatsApp is that its use does not allow us to comply with our legal

GWASANAETH SIFIL LLYWODRAETH CYMRU WELSH GOVERNMENT CIVIL SERVICE

Cefnogi Gweinidogion | Supporting Ministers Cyflawni a Rhagoriaeth

i Gyflawni dros Gymru | to Deliver for Wales Delivery and Excellence

INQ000396686_0002

Gweithio'n well
Improving how we work

responsibilities as a data controller. The full statement explains the position and includes the
alternatives for staff. In the same way that personal email accounts cannot be used to
undertake Welsh Government business, personal WhatsApp accounts may not be used for
Welsh Government business.

Social media security

Any digital platform can be compromised, | advise that you do everything that you can to
secure your personal social media accounts including LinkedIn. Annex 3 provides links to
information which explains how to add two factor authentication to your personal social media
accounts. These additional measures e.g. a text message being sent to your mobile phone
whenever the account is accessed from a new device greatly reduce the risk of your account
being compromised.

Digital Footprint

Even if you don’t use social media, you have a digital footprint as others hold electronic
information about you. If you are a social media user, it is worth pausing and reflecting how
your social media use impacts your digital footprint. Please take time to read the guide that is

published by the Centre for Protection of National Infrastructure.

Peter Kennedy
Welsh Government Senior Information Risk Owner (SIRO)

Issue date: 28 January 2020

GWASANAETH SIFIL LLYWODRAETH CYMRU WELSH GOVERNMENT CIVIL SERVICE

Cefnogi Gweinidogion | Supporting Ministers Cyflawni a Rhagoriaeth

i Gyflawni dros Gymru | to Deliver for Wales Delivery and Excellence

INQ000396686_0003

Gweithio'n well
Improving how we work

Annex 1
Case study — Welsh Government social media incident
Note: names have been changed

A member of staff (Chris) was encouraged to use Twitter via a personal email address to
promote their work. They were told that it was easier to do this than use their Welsh
Government phone. Chris is highly thought of by Welsh Government colleagues and key
stakeholders. Their line management had no concerns about their Twitter account.

Media organisations contacted the Press Office requiring responses because Chris’ Twitter
account had liked offensive material. Whilst the material was not illegal, it was incompatible
with their role in Welsh Government. A key stakeholder also formally complained to Welsh

Government about the matter. Whilst some were careful to state that the activity happened
from Chris’ account, others accused Chris directly. The First Minister also received a direct
complaint.

Chris accessed their Twitter account from a personal laptop (password known to family
members), a kindle (no password) and a personal mobile phone (password known to others
and phone occasionally left on a desk). There was no two factor authentication on the Twitter
account.

The investigation focussed on a number of possibilities:
e Chris had either deliberately or accidentally liked the content;
e A member of Chris’ family had either deliberately or accidentally liked the content;
e Chris’ account had been hacked.

Chris had to explain the incident to their family and directed them how to respond if
approached on the phone or at home by the media. Chris realised the damage that the
allegation caused to their work area and that their particular role in Welsh Government was
untenable.

During the investigation, evidence was found that the account had been hacked. As evidence
was found that the account had been hacked and that Chris’ line management had
encouraged them to use a personal Twitter account for Welsh Government use, there was no
HR case to answer about Chris’ social media use on this occasion.

Each case referred to HR is carefully considered on its own merits. In the specific
circumstances of this case, had it not been possible to prove that Chris was not at fault, they
would have faced formal disciplinary action and would not have been able to keep their current
role in Welsh Government. This could have been a life changing incident for them.

GWASANAETH SIFIL LLYWODRAETH CYMRU WELSH GOVERNMENT CIVIL SERVICE

Cefnogi Gweinidogion | Supporting Ministers Cyflawni a Rhagoriaeth

i Gyflawni dros Gymru | to Deliver for Wales Delivery and Excellence

INQ000396686_0004

Gweithio'n well
Improving how we work

Case study — Wales Office incident

In November 2019, the media reported that the UK Government in Wales Twitter account had
been hacked and used to re-Tweet pornographic content.

While details of the investigation were not made public, had two factor authentication been
implemented and activity restricted to devices own by the organisation, it’s extremely unlikely
that the incident would have occurred.

GWASANAETH SIFIL LLYWODRAETH CYMRL WELSH GOVERNMENT CIVIL SERVICE

Cefnogi Gweinidogion | Supporting Ministers Cyflawni a Rhagoriaeth

i Gyflawni dros Gymru | to Deliver for Wales Delivery and Excellence

INQ000396686_0005

Gweithio'n well

Improving how we work

Annex 2
List of Welsh Government Social Media Accounts

The list of Welsh Government Social Media Accounts can be found at
https://documents.hf.wales.gov.uk/id:A28847595/document/versions/published

GWASANAETH SIFIL LLYWODRAETH CYMRU WELSH GOVERNMENT CIVIL SERVICE

Cefnogi Gweinidogion | Supporting Ministers Cyflawni a Rhagoriaeth

i Gyflawni dros Gymru | to Deliver for Wales Delivery and Excellence

INQ000396686_0006

Gweithio'n well
Improving how we work

Annex 3
Two Factor Authentication (2FA) (sometimes called two-step verification)

2FA adds a layer of security to your account.

It works by requiring you to enter something that you know (your password) and something
that you have e.g. a code that is sent to a pre-registered phone. We use 2FA on Welsh
Government laptops — the RSA app.

Many service providers e.g. Amazon, PayPal, Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn support the use of
2FA, but not many insist that you use it.

Some providers offer a choice of authentication methods. The more secure are those that use
an authenticator app (a software token) as opposed to a text message (SMS). Free
authenticator apps that are compatible with most services are the Microsoft and Google
authenticator apps.

Use the https://twofactorauth.org/ website to find out if your providers e.g. email, banking,
social media support 2FA. Enter the provider name in the search field e.g. Twitter to see what

they support. Clicking the blue book icon © on search results will take you to the provider's
instruction page.

To save you looking them up, some of the common provider pages are listed below:
Google (including Gmail) - https:/Avww.google.com/landing/2step/

Twitter - https://help.twitter.com/en/managing-your-account/two-factor-authentication

Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/help/148233965247823

Instagram - https://help instagram.com/566810106808145

LinkedIn - https:/Avww.linkedin.com/help/linkedin/answer/531 /two-step-verification-overview?lang=en

Amazon - https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeld=202073820

lf your account is hacked, immediately report it to the provider. Google “how to report a
hacked xxxx account” to get help from the provider e.g. “how to report a hacked twitter
account”.

GWASANAETH SIFIL LLYWODRAETH CYMRU WELSH GOVERNMENT CIVIL SERVICE

Cefnogi Gweinidogion | Supporting Ministers Cyflawni a Rhagoriaeth

i Gyflawni dros Gymru | to Deliver for Wales Delivery and Excellence

INQ000396686_0007
